ICT 2014 Karlsruhe June 2014 
Energetic binders DNAN vs TNT 
Evaluation of melt-cast explosive compositions based on TNT and DNAN 
Authors C. COULOUARN R. AUMASSON P. LAMY-BRACQ S. BULOT 
 Corresponding Author c.coulouarnnexter-group.fr 
Several  years  ago  a  new  binder  appeared  as  an  alternative  solution  for  melt-cast  composition.  This 
molecule 24-Dinitroanisole DNAN considered as a new binder is known since the World War II Amatol 
40 was used the warhead of some V-1 flying bombs. In recent years new explosive compositions based 
on  DNAN  have  been  formulated  and  characterised  e.g.  IMX  family  or  PAX  family.  Characterisation  of 
DNAN based explosive compositions have been already presented  in open literature in comparison with 
TNT or Composition B. In the recent symposiums insensitive compositions based DNAN are considered 
to replace  Composition  B. So it  is  not relevant study  comparison  indeed  Composition  B  is  used  as  an 
international standard for the cost efficiency it is not used for its low vulnerability. 
This  paper  presents  2 major  explosive compositions  based  on  the melt-cast  technology  which included 
TNT  and  DNAN.  Two  families  have  been  chosen  i.e.  melt-cast  explosive  MCX-6100  and  XF11585. 
These two formulations are very close in terms of final munitions applications. After a brief description of 
the melt-cast explosive compositions the key properties of DNAN-formulation and XF-formulation will be 
given.  This  work  has  been  performed  by  Nexter  Munitions  using  the  same  pyrotechnic  workshop 
equipment  and  by  applying  the  same  detonics  test  procedures  and  devices.  This  paper  provides  a 
baseline characterisation of low sensitivity explosive compositions based on DNAN and TNT. 
2.  The melt cast process and useful binders 
The melt  cast  process  is  defined  as  the  technology  based  on  a  fusible  energetic  binder.  To  date  the 
most described binders are the following ones 246-TNT and 24-DNAN. These 2 different molecules are 
well  described  in  the  open  literature.  TNT  is  often  described  as  the  most  common  conventional  military 
explosive aromatic molecule whereas DNAN is often described as a new molecule which is considered 
as  a  replacement  for  TNT.  However  DNAN  is  not  really  a  new  energetic  binder.  The  first  recorded 
explosive composition which included DNAN was used during World War II in V-1 flying bombs. DNAN 
was used as a replacement for TNT due to the fact that it was difficult to supply TNT. Both molecules are 
now well described in the open literature for example DTSO publication  2 . The following pictures give 
details about pictures and structure of DNAN and TNT. 
Figure 1  The structure of 24-dinitroanisole DNAN and 246-trinitrotolune TNT  2  
24- DNAN is considered to be a chemical product with hazard class 4.1 or 6.1 while TNT is considered to 
be an explosive with hazard class 1.1.  
2.1  TNT and DNAN pyrotechnic and chemical properties 
To  complete  the  results  described  in  the  literature  characterisations  have  been  performed  at  Nexter 
Munitions premises. 
C. Coulouarn and al. NEXTER Munitions 7 route de guerry 18023 Bourges c.coulouarnnexter-group.fr 
Pyrotechnics properties 
The pyrotechnic properties have been evaluated on the same test equipment and with the same operator. 
The results are shown in the table below 
Table 1  pyrotechnics properties of DNAN and TNT 
Friction sensitivity 
Electrostatic discharges 
Velocity of detonation 
As  observed  in the  previous  table  both  energetic  binders  have  similar  sensitivities.  DNAN  seems  to  be 
less  sensitive  and  to  have  a  better  thermal  stability.  Velocity  of  detonation  of  TNT  is  30  greater  than 
TNT and DNAN are used as energetic liquid binders and viscosity at a temperature close to  the melting 
point is one of major data in order to implement these molecules in industrial equipment for ammunition 
filling. A comparative study had been performed using an Anton Paar MCR301 rheometer. The following 
curves show the rheological behaviour of each binder. 
Figure 2 rheological behavior of DNAN left at 95C and TNT right at 85C 
The  trial  temperatures  have  been  adjusted  so  that  they  are  slightly  higher  than  the  melting  point  of  the 
dedicated binder. DNAN has a lower viscosity than TNT. 
Implementation of energetic binders TNT and DNAN in melt-cast reactor 
The TNT and DNAN binders were implemented in the laboratory reactor which enables us to assess the 
viscosity of the pure product as shown in Figure 3.  
Table 2 TNT and DNAN implementation 
Industrial melting equipment 
Steam or calorific liquid 
Steam or calorific liquid 
After the melting phase the two binders present the same aspect as described in the following pictures. 
C. Coulouarn and al. NEXTER Munitions 7 route de guerry 18023 Bourges c.coulouarnnexter-group.fr 
DNAN Inside of glass reactor 
TNT Inside of glass reactor 
Figure 3 Melting phase - DNAN at 95C - left and TNT at 85C - right 
The first comment which can be made seeing  these pictures concerns the similarities of both molecules 
once  melted.  The  second  comment  relates  to  the  similar  of  rheological  behaviour  of  the  binders  when 
Economic performances 
The TNT binder is well known as a cost efficient molecule. Currently price of D type TNT MP 80.4C is 
about  3-3.5  kg. The DNAN is a molecule which is from 3 and 5 times more expensive than TNT  7 .   
Environmental performances 
Fusible  binders  like  TNT  or  DNAN  offer  an  interesting  advantage  with  regard  to  environment  and  to 
demilitarization  aspects.  In  fact  Nexter  Munitions  has  already  worked  on  the  reversibility  of  TNT  matrix 
and thanks to the low melting point of Trinitrotoluene TNT an explosive composition implementing TNT 
can  be  re-melted.  When  the  service  life  is  about  to  come  to  an  end  a  non-destructive  process  could 
therefore  be  suggested  in  order  to  dismantle  ammunition  with  TNT-based  explosive  compositions. 
Comparative  work  on  demilitarisation  and  remelting  explosive  blocks  has  been  performed  by  FOI  and 
Eurenco Bofors  7 . 
DNAN and TNT are two energetic binders making it possible explosive composition detonics properties to 
be  boosted  compared  to  inert  binders.  After  implementation  at  a  laboratory  scale  the  DNAN  molecule 
compared to the old and well-tried TNT molecule presents some similarities in terms of viscosity and low 
sensitivity but some drawbacks have been identified. Indeed the main drawbacks are the following ones 
higher  melting  point  of  DNAN  and  higher  price  of  DNAN.  To  go  further  DNAN  is  considered  to replace 
TNT  in low-sensitivity  explosive compositions.  Contrary  to  TNT DNAN is  therefore  not  used  as  a single 
main charge. So in order to compare these 2 energetic binders it appears to be necessary to compare 2 
explosive  compositions  with  the  same  calibre  range  of  targeted  applications.  Moreover  these  explosive 
compositions must have low sensitivity.  
3.  Low-sensitivity  explosive  compositions  based  on  TNT  and  DNAN 
This  paper  presents  a  comparative  study  between  low-sensitivity  explosive  compositions  TNT-based 
XF11585  and  DNAN-based  MCX-6100.  The  explosive  composition  MCX-6100  has  been  supplied  at 
Chemring  Nobel  Norway.  As  a  comparison  only  IMX-104  formulation  was  added.  The  following  table 
shows percentages of explosive compositions. 
C. Coulouarn and al. NEXTER Munitions 7 route de guerry 18023 Bourges c.coulouarnnexter-group.fr 
Table 3 formulation of XF11585 and MCX-6100 
Name of formulation 
Chemring Nobel Norway 
Home-Made mass production 
Flakes mass production 
So XF11585 explosive composition based on TNT is a home-made explosive composition which can be 
described as a comparatively easy process which can be divided into 3 main steps. The binder TNT is 
melted in the glass reactor. Then granular explosives are introduced into the liquid binder at the adjusted 
temperature  under  slow  agitation.  The  explosive  composition  is  mixed  for  a  time  period  of  time  before 
being  poured.  The  second  explosive  DNAN-based  MCX-6100  is  a  ready-to-use  explosive  which  is  put 
into  the  reactor  and  melts  using  also  a  low  agitation.  Once  the  flakes  have  been  melted  the  mixing  is 
ready  for  pouring.  In  terms  of  implementation  the  major  difference  between  TNT  and  explosive 
composition based on DNAN is the melting point which requires higher temperature for heat equipment.  
3.1  Pyrotechnic and chemical properties of MCX-6100 and XF11585 
Pyrotechnic sensitivities 
All of following tests have been performed using the same operator and testing instruments. 
Table 4  pyrotechnic properties 
Friction sensitivity 
Electrostatic discharges 
Temperature of initiation 
Julius Peter apparatus 
Nexter Munitions apparatus 
Not yet performed at Nexter 
The basic safety tests show that the XF11585 explosive composition is less sensitive than MCX-6100. 
The temperature of ignition of XF11585 is higher than MCX-6100 compared to the results obtained for 
bare  TNT  or  bare  DNAN  the  sensitivity  to  this  test  is  induced  by  the  RDX  percentage  in  the  explosive 
compositions and it is difficult to predict the temperature of initiation of MCX-6100.  
Differential  Scanning  Calorimetry  DSC  tests  were  carried  out  with  XF11585  samples  and  MCX-6100 
samples  in  a  close  vessel.  The  warming  slope  was  subjected  to  5Cmin  ramping  up  to  500C  in 
accordance with STANAG 4515. Tests were also performed at 4 different temperatures in order to assess 
to the energy of activation. The graph is presented in the Figure 4. 
                                                           
1 Data public release extracted from MSIAC data. 
C. Coulouarn and al. NEXTER Munitions 7 route de guerry 18023 Bourges c.coulouarnnexter-group.fr 
Figure 4 thermal analysis - DSC 
Table 5 DSC analysis of XF11585 and MCX-6100 
Temperature of decomposition 
Energy of activation Ea 
Finally the heat capacity of XF11585 and MCX-6100 explosive compositions was determined. 
Table 6 heat capacity JgK by DSC 
Thermochemical properties were used to simulate the cooling process of MCX-6100.  
Implementation of energetic binders in melt-cast reactor 
The XF11585 and MCX-6100 explosive compositions were implemented in the laboratory reactor which 
enables  us  to assess  the  quality  of  the mixture as  shown  in Figure  6.  The  explosive compositions  have 
been implemented with higher temperatures due to their differences in terms of binders melting point. 
Table 7 TNT and DNAN implementation 
Industrial melting equipment 
Steam or calorific liquid 
Steam or calorific liquid 
After the melting phase the two binders present the same aspect as described in the following pictures. 
Rheological behaviour of XF11585 and MCX-6100  
A  comparative  study  between  MCX-6100  and  XF11585  has  been  performed  using  an  Anton  Paar 
MCR301 rheometer. The following curves show the rheological behaviour of each binder.  
C. Coulouarn and al. NEXTER Munitions 7 route de guerry 18023 Bourges c.coulouarnnexter-group.fr 
Figure 5 rheological study MCX-6100 left and XF11585 right 
MCX-6100 presents a lower viscosity under a very low shear stress whereas the rheological behaviours 
are quite similar 0.3 or 0.4 1s i.e. low shear stress. 
Laboratory implementation 
Once the rheological properties have been assessed XF11585 and MCX-6100 have been implemented 
at  Nexter  munitions  workshop.  The  following  pictures  Figure  6  give  an  overview  of  the  MCX-6100 
implementation from flakes.  
Figure 6 DNAN explosive composition implementation flakes 
The  MCX-6100  explosive  composition  is  weighted  then  melted  in  a  glass  reactor  at  110C.  The  mixing 
phase  is  performed  using  vacuum.  The  bubbles  at  the  surface  of  the  molten  MCX-6100  indicate  the 
presence of air inclusion in the MCX-6100 flakes. 
Then XF11585 has been formulated as illustrated in the following pictures. 
Figure 7 XF11585 implementation 
The TNT is melted in a glass reactor and then the granular explosives and inert parts are added. Thus as 
for the MCX-6100 preparation the XF11585 is also mixed using vacuum. Bubbles are also observed at 
the surface of the explosive composition due to the introduction of the granular components. 
C. Coulouarn and al. NEXTER Munitions 7 route de guerry 18023 Bourges c.coulouarnnexter-group.fr 
No  major  differences  were  observed  during  the  mixing  phase  of  the  energetic  compositions.  During  the 
pouring phase the 2 explosive compositions had a similar rheological behaviour. 
Upon completion of the mixing phase both explosive compositions have been pouring into a steel mould. 
After the cooling process the explosive blocks have been recovered. 
                                      
Figure 8  XF11585 left and MCX-6100 right blocks 
3.3  Machining of Explosive compositions 
Explosive blocks can be assessed by analyses such as X-Ray inspection but the machining step is also 
an efficient way to assess the properties and quality of explosive formulations. The following pictures show 
a comparison between machining DNAN-based and TNT-based explosive compositions. 
Figure 9 machining of MCX-6100 explosive blocks 
Both  explosive  compositions  presented  excellent  behaviours  during  the  machining  step.  Dimensional 
accuracy  is  quite  easy  to  achieve.  Concerning  the  raiser  of  the  explosive  blocks  Nexter  munitions  had 
performed some analyses. So for the XF11585 X-ray inspection can be performed due to the presence 
of aluminium in order to estimate the depth of the shrinkage porosity  whereas the MCX-6100 explosive 
composition was analysed by machining. It is well known that the raiser of explosive compositions based 
on  TNT  is  eliminated  from  the  bare  block.  The  following  pictures  give  details  about  the  raiser  of  MCX6100.  
C. Coulouarn and al. NEXTER Munitions 7 route de guerry 18023 Bourges c.coulouarnnexter-group.fr 
Figure 10 assessment of raiser extracted from various of MCX-6100 blocks 
Following the assessment of MCX-6100 blocks special attention was given to the cooling process so as 
to avoid cracks or voids in the raiser. So the  quantity  of explosive into the raiser needed for MCX-6100 
appears to be lower than that needed for XF11585.  
3.4  Mechanical properties by uniaxial compression 
The  mechanical  properties  of  DNAN-  and  TNT-based  explosive  compositions  were  determined  using  a 
Zwick testing Machine. The mechanical properties were determined at 20C room temperature using the 
AFNOR  standard  procedure  NFT  70-314.  The  test  was  performed  using  a  compressive  sample  being 
20.5 mm long and having a diameter of 20 mm. Samples from the following cutting scheme were tested.  
Top density 1.74 gcm3 
Middle density 1.75 gcm3 
Figure 11 sample location for mechanical properties of MCX-6100 
Bottom density 1.75 gcm3 
C. Coulouarn and al. NEXTER Munitions 7 route de guerry 18023 Bourges c.coulouarnnexter-group.fr 
No  significant  difference  was  found  between  the  various  section  samples.  The  mechanical  properties 
measured according to NFT 70-314 AFNOR standard are presented in the following Table 2. 
Table 8 XF11585 mechanical properties 
The mechanical properties of DNAN- or TNT-based explosive compositions are very similar and there are 
higher  than  those  of  composition  B  especially  for  compressive  stress.  Results  show  that  the  Young 
modulus is similar to that of Composition B.  
3.5  Detonics properties  
The  velocity  of  detonation  and  the  unconfined  critical  diameter  were  estimated  using  French  standards 
NFT  70-500 and NFT  70-502  in  Nexter  Munitions  detonation  chamber. The following  pictures  show  the 
results  of  the  tests.  Velocity  of  detonation  and  unconfined  critical  diameter  were  tested  twice  for  each 
The  unconfined  critical  diameter  crit  was  tested  using  a  stepped  cylindrical  charge  with  a  decreasing 
diameter. Each test was boosted with a 50mm x 50mm dia. RDXWax 955 pellet.  
Figure 12 MCX-6100 unconfined critical diameter 
The experimental results show a critical diameter of 20  crit  30 mm. Similar results were measured for 
Figure 13 shows the layout used for the velocity of detonation test. 
Figure 13 XF11585 - velocity of detonation 
Each  test  was  ignited  with  a  50mm  dia.  RDXWax  955  booster.  The  experimental  results  are 
summarised in the Table . 
C. Coulouarn and al. NEXTER Munitions 7 route de guerry 18023 Bourges c.coulouarnnexter-group.fr 
Table 9 detonics properties 
Composition  Sample 
Unconfined  critical diameter 
Velocity of detonation 
7300 ms 1.73 g.cm-3 
7314 ms 1.75 g.cm-3 
The results reached for the MCX-6100 explosive compositions are compliant with those described in the 
open literature for IMX-104 for the unconfined velocity of detonation but results regarding VoD are slightly 
lower than those published 7400 ms  6 .  
3.6  Shock sensitivity of XF11585 versus MCX-6100 
In  order  to  compare  the  shock  sensitivity  of  these  2  low-sensitivity  explosive  compositions  shock 
sensitivity  tests  were  performed  using  the  large-scale gap  test  method  with  PMMA  barrier  according  to 
Table 10 LSGT results for MCX-6100 XF11585 and Composition B 
Composition  Sample 
The  shock  sensitivity  is  reported  in  terms  of  minimum  pressure  that  can  initiate  detonation.  Based  on 
these results the shock initiation pressure for XF11585 is estimated to be approx. upper than 50 kbars. 
XF11585 presents a low shock sensitivity compared to MCX-6100 approx. 36 kbars. In fact the RDX 
molecule induces the sensitivity of the explosive composition despite of the low shock sensitivity of DNAN. 
As already observed RS-RDX is not efficient in molten DNAN  9 . 
3.7  Pyrotechnic train 
The  development  of  low  sensitive  explosive  compositions  requires  a  suitable  initiation  train.  Nexter 
Munitions developed a quite easy test to quickly evaluate the capability to ignite explosive compositions. 
Steel tubes extracted from LSGT test STANAG 4488 have been used. The characteristic of this tube is 
well described in the dedicated STANAG inner diameter 73 mm outer diameter 95 mm length 280 mm. 
Explosive composition is ignited by a PDM 557 fuze. The test is described in the following pictures. 
C. Coulouarn and al. NEXTER Munitions 7 route de guerry 18023 Bourges c.coulouarnnexter-group.fr 
Figure 14 initiation trials of XF11585 left and MCX-6100 right with PDM 557 fuze 23 g of RDXWAX 
Initiation tests have been successfully performed on this XF11585 explosive composition using only a 
PDM 557  no  additional  booster  has  been  added.  The  tests  performed  with  MCX-6100  have  shown 
deflagration  results  Banana  shape  fragments  Figure  14  right  picture.  The  MCX-6100  explosive 
composition  requires  an  additional  performing  booster  in  order  to  ignite  the  DNAN  main  charge  in 
detonation. The conclusion is compliant with literature concerning traditional DNAN explosive composition 
such  as  IMX-104  which  also  required  an  additional  booster  in  PBXN-5  to  be  ignited  or  225g  of  plastic 
explosive for IMX-101  4 .  
3.8  Ageing performances 
The TNT molecule has been used by the French Forces for more than 50 years in TNT shells Compo B 
shells or NTOTNT warheads. The chemical compatibilities between NTO TNT and RDX are ensured by 
natural ageing for 50 years. 
In spite of all these technical constraints the TNT melt cast process suffers from a bad image due to the 
exudation phenomena. This  issue was solved many  years  ago by adding certain additives for example 
absorbents  have  been  used  by  Eurenco  Bofors  AB    8    or  by  using  a  high  quality  of  TNT.  Nexter 
Munitions has performed some experiments according to the following temperature cycles 15 runs 40C 
RH 40 to 70C. The following pictures show the results obtained with a 155mm LU XF shell and a 
155mm Comp B shell. 
Figure 15 Exudation - XF versus Comp B 
So the DNAN molecule also presents some effect of exudation or sublimation as shown in the last Parari 
symposium in Australia  1 . 
C. Coulouarn and al. NEXTER Munitions 7 route de guerry 18023 Bourges c.coulouarnnexter-group.fr 
Figure 16 temperature effect on explosive composition based on DNAN  60C  3 months  1  
These pictures have been extracted from the DTSO presentation at Parari 2013. As illustrated by Figure 
16  this  picture  sublimation  of  DNAN  was  observed  by  the  Australian  laboratory.  The  explosive 
tested  are  ARX  4027  RDXDNAN  ARX  4028  NTODNAN  and  ARX  4029 
NTODNANRDX. To date no evaluation has been performed on the shell. 
Melt casting is one of the processes used all over the world for the production of ammunition. The major 
energetic  binders  used  in  this  process  are  TNT  and  DNAN.  DNAN  is  often  found  to  replace  TNT  in 
explosive compositions. The comparative study between TNT and DNAN performed by Nexter Munitions 
shows that it is difficult to compare bare charges of TNT and bare charges of DNAN. Because of the low 
detonics performances DNAN is never used as a main charge. 2 major explosive compositions in the low 
sensitivity  field  i.e.  XF11585  and  MCX-6100  have  been  chosen  so  as  to  compare  DNAN  and  TNT 
The  implementation  of  DNAN-based  explosive  compositions  requires  higher  temperature  of  the  heating 
process in order to be able to melt this molecule. This issue is not insurmountable in the current melt-cast 
facilities while TNT-based explosive compositions i.e. the XF family are compliant with standard meltcast filling plants. 
The performances of  both explosive compositions were tested with the same test procedures and in the 
same  testing  area.  So  the  performances  of  TNT-based  explosive  compositions  are  better  than  DNANbased explosive compositions shock sensitivity unconfined critical diameter economic performances and 
pyrotechnic train are better with TNT binder.  
The  viscosity  and  mechanical  properties  are  quite  similar  between  for  explosive  compositions  and  fully 
compliant with the melt-cast process. The velocity of detonation of MCX-6100 which was tested according 
to the French standard is slightly lower than that of IMX-104 found in the literature. 
The last data available in the literature show a sublimation of DNAN. This issue is interesting thus further 
work  is  needed  to  assess  the  thermal  behaviour  of  these  explosive  compositions  in  ammunition 
accelerated ageing corresponding at 20y of storage. 
As  a  conclusion  TNT  and  DNAN  boost  the  detonics  properties  of  explosive  compositions  unlike  inert 
binders. Thus TNT seems to be the best trade-off in terms of processing economic aspects and detonics 
and vulnerability  performances.  Moreover  the  use  of  TNT  binders  offers  m a ny  advantages  a   lar g e 
background  in  terms  of  ageing  a  cheaper  energetic  binder  a  simple  pyrotechnic  train  and  better 
vulnerability performances. 
C. Coulouarn and al. NEXTER Munitions 7 route de guerry 18023 Bourges c.coulouarnnexter-group.fr 
 1   Ageing of Insensitive DNAN Based Melt-cast Explosives  Dr A. Provatas C. Wall DTSO Parari 2013 
  2      Characterisation  of  24-Dinitroanisole  an  ingredient  for  use  in  low  Sensitivity  Melt-Cast  Formulations    Dr  A. 
Provatas P.J. Davies DTSO-TR-1904 
 3   Development and manufacture of an insensitive composition B replacement explosive for mortar applications  V. 
Fung C. Patel M. Ervin B. Alexander P. Samuel BAE Systems  IMEMTS 2010 Munich 
  4    Initiation  Trials  of  the  IMX-101  Explosive  in  the  M795  projectile  A.  Di  Stasio  D.  Nguyen  C.  Patel  E.  Wrobel  US 
 5   XF11585  application for 60 mm to 120 mm ammunition range Coulouarn Lamy-Bracq R. Aumasson Cotet Bulot 
IMEMTS 2012 Las Vegas 
 6   Evaluation of IMX Explosives IMX-101  IMX-104 for the ADF  Dr A. Provatas C. Wall DTSO Parari 2013 
  7      GUNTONAL    an  Insensitive  Melt  Cast  for  Underwater  Warhead    Dr  P.  Sjberg  Dr  H.  stmark  AM.  Amnus 
Eurenco FOI  IMEMTS 2010 Munich 
 8   GUNTOL  a low cost melt cast for IM Dr P. Sjberg Dr H. stmark AM. Amnus Eurenco FOI. 
  9      Review  on  melt-cast  explosives  P.  Ravi  D.  M.  Badgujar  G.  M.  Gore  S.  P.  Tewari  A.  K.  Sikder  Propellants 
Explosives pyrotechnics vol.36 issue 5 October 2011 p393-403. 
C. Coulouarn and al. NEXTER Munitions 7 route de guerry 18023 Bourges c.coulouarnnexter-group.fr 
Sustainable Ammunition Safety SAS 
Wim de Klerk Peter Hooijmeijer and Peter van Harmelen 
TNO Defence Safety and Security 
Dept Energetic Materials 
E-mail wim.deklerktno.nl 
In the Netherlands no national industry in the field of energetic materials  ammunition for 
military applications is available. The knowledge of explosives ammunition and ammunition 
on the vulnerability of platforms is limited first to Defence regarding the logistical and 
operational practice and second to TNO and focuses mainly on fundamental and innovative 
ammunition-related research including research IM.  
In 2014 a new program starts for a period of 4 years which has the following aim 
  Maintaining and further developing the technological knowledge and skills regarding 
the effects of ageing on the safe use of munitions and energetic materials contained 
  Providing a method for combining mechanical loads IM perspective in order to 
support the safety and reliability of ammunition during deployment in a dynamic 
  Developing a methodology that on the one hand provides insight into the factors that 
affect the life of the ammunition and other measures that can be used to positively 
influence the security availability and lifetime taken 
  Developing a methodology in an operational situation to take regarding an extended 
lifespan in compliance with safe use and deployment a sound decision 
  Conducting an analysis focusing on the possible risks of taking on qualification and 
classification records of ammunition articles from other NATO countries or external 
parties and the transition from a full to a tailor-made TC process 
In this study attention is paid to what are the consequences of applying IM materials on the 
explosive mass quantities with the corresponding safety distances during transport and 
storage larger masses are possible. Next point is to address the packaging. Would it be 
possible by changing the package material to reduce  minimize the IM response. And finally 
is there a relationship to be established between the use of IM materials and design and 
therefore the cost of packaging of ammunition items.  
Besides the IM issue effort is put in optimalisation of the Type-classification process ageing 
and modeling of energetic materials and compositions with adequate models and analytical Investigation of the Nitrate based EIL 4-Amino-1-methyl-124
triazolium nitrate as a plasticizer 
Uwe Schaller Volker Weiser Thomas Keicher Horst Krause 
Fraunhofer Institut Chemische Technologie ICT 
Joseph-von-Fraunhoferstrae 7 76327 Pfinztal Germany 
E-mail uwe.schallerict.fraunhofer.de 
The energetic ionic liquid EIL 4-Amino-1-methyl-124-triazolium nitrate AMTN was 
compared  to  other  energetic  plasticizers  such  as  Nitroglycerine  NGL  nButyl 
Nitroxyethylnitramine  Bu-NENA  and  Dinitrodiaza  plasticizer  DNDA57  in  terms  of 
melting and decomposition temperature mechanical sensitivity heat of explosion and 
generated gas volume. 
Ionic  liquids  ILs  are  commonly  defined  as  organic  salts  being  liquid  at  room 
temperature  with  unusually  low  melting  points1.  They  are  in  the  focus  of  recent 
research and finding application in more and more fields of life. The applications range 
from  novel  reaction  media2  as  electrolytes  in  batteries3  solar  cells4  gas  storing 
media5 lubricants6 and heat transfer fluids7 to mention only a small excerpt of the 
investigated and in use applications. The research on ILs began already in 1888 with 
ethanolammonium  nitrate  mp  52-54  C  an  energetic  protic  IL  synthesized  and 
characterized  by  Gabriel8  and  ethylammonium  nitrate  mp  13-14  C  Paul  Walden 
19149. However the new class of ionic liquids only became subject of interest in the 
late 1990s were the publications on ILs started growing exponential.  
In the field of energetic materials and processing ionic liquids receive serious interest. 
Potential  applications  are  none  volatile  plasticizers  high  explosives  and  liquid 
propellants.  In  this  study  we  wanted  to  investigate  the  potential  of  an  EIL  as  a 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
As  an  example  of  an  energetic  ionic  liquid  we  investigated  4-Amino-1-methly-124triazole  AMTN  which  was  first  mentioned  in  literature  2002  by  Greg  W.  Drake  et 
al.10.  AMTN  offers  a  wide  operation  temperature  range  from  a  glass  transition 
temperature  of  -55  C  and  a  decomposition  temperature  above  200  C.  The 
mechanical sensitivity of AMTN towards friction and impact is low 10 Nm and 144 N 
fricition sensitivity 
glass transition temperature 
decomposition temperature 
Figure 1 Mechanical sensitivity data thermal properties and chemical structure of AMTN. 
The  density  of  the  EIL  is  quite  high  with  14  gcm3  due  to  its  ionic  nature.  The 
viscosity of AMTN 454 mPa s at 20 C is higher compared to traditional plasticizers. 
The density and viscosity of AMTN in relation to the temperature is shown in Figure 2. 
Figure 2 Temperature dependent density and viscosity of AMTN. 
Upon  heating  in  nitrogen  stream  up  to  120  C  AMTN  does  not  evaporate  due  to  its 
ionic nature instead of NGL Bu-NENA and DNDA57 shown in Figure 3. Because of the 
very low vapor pressure a significantly reduced environmental risk and better storage 
and handling properties are expected. 
plasticizer  mass loss 
                  AMTN-2h-iso120C.001
                  BuNENA-2h-iso120C.001
                  DNDA-russisch-2h-iso120C.001
                  NGL-2h-iso120C.001
Universal V4.7A TA In 
Figure 3 Mass loss of different energetic plasticizers during heating in a nitrogen stream. 
AMTN  was  compared  to  conventional  energetic  plasticizers  like  NGL  Bu-NENA  and 
DNDA57 using thermogravimetric analysis TGA shown in Figure 4.  
                  NGL.001
                  Butyl-Nena-RXL-647.001
                  DNDA-57-russisch.001
                  US-157-AMNT.001
Universal V4.7A TA In 
Figure 4 TGA of AMTN and conventional energetic plasticizers NGL Bu-NENA DNDA57. 
Properties  of  conventional  energetic  plasticizers  and  AMTN  are  shown  in  Figure  5. 
AMTN  combines  a  wide  temperature  range  compared  with  a  good  mechanical 
insensitivity and a high gas volume yield. 
Figure 5 Comparison of conventional energetic plasticizers to AMTN. 
a melting point b high vapor pressure of EGDN in brackets with semi-closed vessel c calculated by ICTThermodynamic code water liquid d without H2O at 25 C. 
The  long  term  stability  was  investigated  and  found  to  be  very  good.  A  TAM 
measurement of AMTN at 80 C and 15 days revealed no significant generation of heat 
Figure 6 Heat Flow Calorimetry measurement of AMTN in a Thermal Activity Monitor calorimeter at 80 C 
AMTN  has  interesting  plasticizing  abilities.  The  gelatination  of  NC  N    12.6  with 
AMTN  5050  wt  is  fast  and  produces  transparent  flexible  foils  which  is  shown  in 
Figure 7. Thermal analysis of the material revealed a glass transition temperature of 33 C and an onset decomposition temperature of 170 C DSC HR5 Figure 8. The 
onset decomposition temperature is 4 C lower compared to NGLNC measured under 
the same conditions. Rheological studies of EGDN NGL DNDA57 and AMTN with 1 2 
and 5 wt NC are shown in Figure 9. EGDN with the addition of 5 wt NC has a too 
high viscosity to be measured under chosen conditions. AMTN has the lowest absolute 
viscosity of the investigated mixtures with 5 wt NC and the lowest viscosity increase 
Figure 10 proving its promising gelatination abilities. 
Figure 7 Microscopic picture of AMTN  NC left and flexible transparent foil of AMTN  NC. 
Figure 8 Glass transition temperature and decomposition temperature of NCAMNT and comparison to NGL 
Figure 9 Viscosity of EGDN NGL DNDA57 and AMTN with different wt content of NC and shear rates. 
Figure  10  Viscosity  of  NGL  DNDA57  and  AMTN  with  5  wt  of  NC  at  a  shear  rate  of  108  s-1  left  and 
viscosity increase with 5 wt of NC in comparison to pure plasticizer right. 
Figure 11 Combustion of NCAMTN 5050 wt under different nitrogen pressures. 
Figure  12  Measured  combustion  temperatures  of  NCAMTN  left  under  nitrogen  pressure  at  7  MPa  vs 
calculated temperature right. 
Strands  of  AMTNNC  were  produced  and  burned  in  an  optical  window  bomb  under 
nitrogen  to  evaluate  the  theoretical  calculations  by  measuring  the  combustion 
temperature shown in Figure 11 and Figure 12. 
Upon performing long term stability tests at 80 C and 105 C over 20 and 75 hours 
AMTN  revealed  to  be  not  long  term  stable  with  NC.  Even  with  the  addition  of 
traditional stabilizers like Centralite I and Akardite II the maximum allowed mass loss 
was  exceeded  reproducible.  The  investigated  samples  turned  yellow  to  brown.  The 
long term incompatibility of AMTN with nitrate ester groups derives most likely from 
the slightly acid nature of the proton in the position number 5 in the ring. Upon the 
abstraction  of  the  proton  in  position  5  an  instable  carbene  triazol-5-ylidene  is 
generated shown in Figure 13. 
Figure  13  N-Amino  functionality  left  slightly  acid  proton  in  position  5  of  AMTN  middle  and  instable 
Impact  sensitivity  and  friction  sensitivity  tests  were  determined  according  to  NATO 
STANAG  4487  and  NATO  STANAG  4489  procedures  with  the  BAM  drop  hammer  and 
friction sensitivity tester made by the former company Julius Peter Berlin. The value 
reported is the smallest load under which deflagration has been noticed at least one 
time in six consecutive tests. For rheological measurements a Rheometer Physica MCR 
501  was  used.  AMTN  was  synthesized  according  to  published  route11  Dinitrodiaza 
plasticizer DNDA57 consist of 24-dinitro-24-diaza-pentane DNDA 5 24-dinitro-24diaza-hexane DNDA 6 35-dinitro-35-diaza-heptane DNDA 7 with about 43  45  
12 wt. Differential scanning calorimetry DSC has been done by a TA instrument Q 
1000 using pierced aluminum pans. Glass transition points were measured from the 
2nd heating cycle after cooling to -90 C. Thermogravimetric analysis TGA has been 
done  by  a  TA  Q500  apparatus  with  a  scan  rate  of  5  Cmin  under  nitrogen  flux. 
Reported values are the central points. For temperature measurements NIR-spectra 
were  recorded  with  a  Plane  Grating  Spectrometer  PGS-NIR  2.2  from  Carl  ZEISS 
GmbH.  The  wavelength  of  this  monolithic  miniature  spectrograph  ranges  from  1  to 
2.17  m.  As  optical  entrance  a  glass  fiber  is  used.  This  only  allowed  determining 
overall temperatures. The evaluation of NIR emission spectra uses the ICT-BaM code 
to  model  spectra  of  gaseous  reaction  products.  The  procedure  is  described  in  more 
detail in literature12. 
The nitrate based EIL AMTN offers promising properties like very low vapour pressure 
combined  with  good  energetic  performance  and  insensitivity  compared  to  traditional 
energetic plasticizers. However AMTN is not compatible with nitrocellulose in terms of 
long  term  stability.  Because  of  the  unique  properties  of  EILs  investigation  of  AMTN 
with other energetic polymers are subject of future research. 
The  author  would  like  to  thank  A.  Lity  E.  Roth  and  A.  Raab  for  combustion 
experiments H. Schuppler  J. Aniol for TGA and DSC analysis H. Popp for mechanical 
sensitivity  tests  and  U.  Frther-Barth  for  rheological  measurements.  This  work  was 
funded by the German Ministry of Defense. 
1   a T. Welton Chem. Rev. 1999 99 2071-2083. b P. Wasserscheid W. Keim 
Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2000 39 3772-3789. 
2   P. Wasserscheid T. Welton Ionic Liquids in synthesis Wiley-VCH 2002. 
3   a H. Shobukawa H. Tokuda A. B. H. Susan M. Watanabe Electrochim. Acta 
2005 50 3872-3877. b H. Shobukawa H. Tokuda S. Tabata M. Watanabe 
Electrochim.  Acta  2004  50  1-5.  c  S.  Seki  Y.  Kobayashi  H.  Miyashiro  Y. 
Ohno Chem. Commun. 2006 544-545. 
4   D. Kuang S. Uchida R. Humphry-Baker S. M. Zakeeruddin M. Grtzel Angew. 
Chem. 2008 120 1949-1953. 
5   a D. J. Tempel P. B. Henderson J. R. Brzozowski R.M. Pearlstein D. Garg US 
Pat. 20060060818 2006. b D. J. Tempel P. B. Henderson J. R. Brzozowski 
US Pat. 20060060817 2006. 
6   a C. Ye W. Liu Y. Chen L. Yu Chem. Commun. 2001 2244-2245. b X. Liu 
F.  Zhou  Y.  Liang  W.  Liu  Wear  2006  261  1174-1179.  c  T.  Predel  E. 
Schlcker P. Wasserscheid D. Gerhard W. Artl Chem. Eng. Technol. 2007 30 
7   M. E. V. Valkenburg R. L. Vaughn M. Williams J. S. Wilkes Thermochim. Acta 
8   S. Gabriel J. Weiner Ber. 1888 21 2 2669-2679. 
9   a  P.  Walden  Chem.  Zentralbl.  1914  I  1800.  b  N.  V.  Plechkova  K.  R. 
Seddon Chem. Soc. Rev. 2008 37 123-150.  
10  a G. Drake T. Hawkins Research in Energetic Ionic Liquids Report AFRL-PRED-VG-2002-232 2002. b G. Drake T. Hawkins K. Tollison L. Hall 1-Alkyl4-Amino-124-Triazolium Salts New Families of Ionic Liquids Report AFRL-PRED-TP-2003-307 2003. 
11  U. Schaller V. Weiser E. Roth T. Keicher H. Krause 40th International Annual 
Conference of ICT Energetic Materials p. 911-919 2009. 
12  V. Weiser N. Eisenreich Propellants Explos. Pyrotech. 30 p. 67-78 2005. 
D-76327 Pfinztal Germany 
thomas.keicherict.fraunhofer.de 
SYNTHESIS AND PROPERTIES OF RANDOM CO-POLYMER  
POLY-GABAMO AS ENERGETIC BINDER 
Thomas Keicher Wieland Janitschek Uwe Schaller Horst Krause  
Fraunhofer-Institut fr Chemische Technologie Joseph-von-Fraunhofer-Strae 7  
Wehrtechnische Dienststelle fr Waffen und Munition WTD 91 Am Schieplatz 
D-49716 Meppen Germany 
Random  copolymer  with  monomer  units  from  glycidyl  azide  GA  and  33-bisazidomethyloxetane  BAMO  has  been  synthesized  to  produce  a  material  for 
potential  application  as  energetic  binder  for  solid  rocket  propellant..  The  former 
synthesized  halogen  precursor  copolymer  epichlorohydrin33-bis-bromomethyloxetane  ECHBBrMO  has  been  converted  to  an  energetic  polymer  via  azidation 
reaction with NaN3. The introduction of poly-BAMO units in the GAP chain has the 
advantage  of  an  increasing  number  in  azide  groups  and  consequently  in  the 
energetic content of the material but to a limited value that preserves the amorphous 
morphology of the polymer. The synthesis has been up-scaled to 1.1 kg quantity and 
the resulting polymer has been characterized via IR-spectroscopy thermal analysis 
impact  sensitivity  end  group  analysis  molecular  mass 
measurement GPC density viscosity heat of combustion and elemental analysis. 
This  study  has  been  done  under  the  EDA  project  Formulation  and  Production  of 
New Energetic Materials FPNEM PA No B-0585-GEM2-GC. 
Energetic  binders  are  polymers  for  propellants  and  explosives  that  bear  energetic 
functional  groups  along  their  polymer  backbone  which  provide  additional  energy  to 
the  energy  balance  of  the  system.  Such  energetic  groups  are  azido  -N3  nitro  NO2 nitrate ester -ONO2 and nitramino -N-NO2 groups. From these the energetic 
binders  with  azido  groups  approved  to  be  the  most  intensive  studied  modern 
energetic  polymers.  These  binders  are  liquid  oligomers  with  hydroxyl  end  groups 
which will be cured with isocyanates after the explosive fillers oxidizers and metallic 
fuels are mixed homogeneously with the binder. The curing reaction of the hydroxyl 
end groups with the isocyanates build up a polyurethane network. To achieve a cross 
linked  network  the  binder  polymers  andor  the  isocyanates  have  to  be  at  least 
trifunctional. Another possibility to achieve crosslinking in case the polymers and the 
isocyanates  are  difunctional  is  the  adding  of  triols.  The  cured  binder  embeds  the 
explosive fillers oxidizers and metallic fuels in an elastomeric matrix which keeps the 
shapegeometry  of  the  propellants  and  the  explosives.  Furthermore  these  binder 
matrix  is  responsible  for  reducing  the  sensitivity  of  the  energetic  material  by 
absorbing  hazardous  mechanical  stimuli  or  shock  waves  within  the  elastomeric 
binder  matrix  and  protecting  so 
ignitioninitiation. Due to the energetic contribution from the binder the explosive filler 
can be reduced still keeping the overall performance of the energetic material and 
also getting reduced sensitivity to external stimuli. Of course using energetic binders 
instead  of  inert  binders  and  keeping  the  filler  content  unchanged  the  performance 
From energetic binders with azido groups glycidyl azide polymer GAP is the only 
one that is commercial available in Western Europe. GAP has a nitrogen content of 
42.41   monomer unit high positive heat of formation 957 kJkg-1 1 and low 
glass-transition temperature Tg  -48 C. Besides GAP shows good compatibility 
with  high-energy  oxidizers 
like  ammonium  perchlorate  AP  and  ammonium 
dinitramide ADN. Another well known azido binder is poly-BAMO which has even 
higher  nitrogen  content  of  49.98      monomer  unit  and  higher  heat  of  formation 
2209 KJ kg-1 2 than GAP. Unfortunately poly-BAMO is solid at room temperature 
and so it can not be used for cast cured processing of energetic materials. However 
when BAMO units are randomly spread along a GAP chain the resulting copolymer 
stays liquid if the BAMO content does not get too high. Due to the higher nitrogen 
content  in  poly-BAMO  the  copolymer  glycidyl  azide-r-33-bisazidomethyloxetane 
poly-GABAMO  should  be  more  energetic  than  pure  GAP.  The  copolymer  polyGABAMO has been mentioned in literature first time in 2006 3  but no properties of 
the  copolymer  have  been  given.  Later  this  copolymer  has  been  synthesized  in  an 
international cooperation project from Barbieri and Kawamoto et. al. 4 5 as part of 
European project CEPA 14 RTP 14.10. The copolymers had BAMO contents from 
20 to 25 mol- showed higher energy content than GAP and were liquid. However 
these  copolymers  contained  up  to  10  mass-  cyclic  oligomers  had  low  molecular 
weights  and  OH-functionalities  of  around  1.5  which  gives  some  limitations  for  the 
processing of energetic materials functionality of isocyanate  3. The properties of 
the copolymers have been also evaluated in rocket propellant formulations 6 7 8. 
Another  research  group  evaluated  a  GABAMO  copolymer  concerning  its  thermal 
decomposition and its properties as energetic thermoplastic elastomer 9.  
The objectives of this work were to modify the synthesis of copolymer GABAMO that 
the oligomers should be avoided or the amount should be at least reduced. Further 
the functionality of the copolymer should be increased to 2 and the synthesis should 
be up-scaled to provide enough material for evaluation of the modified copolymer in 
rocket propellants. The results from evaluation of the up-scaled GABAMO-copolymer 
as binder for AlAP-based propellants are presented also on this conference 10. 
The work has been done in the European EDA project Formulation and production 
of new energetic materials  FPNEM PA NoB-0585-GEM2-GC.  
SYNTHESIS OF COPOLYMER GABAMO 
The  synthesis  of  copolymer  GABAMO  involves  two  steps.  First  the  halogenated 
precursor is synthesized from a monomer mixture of epichlorohydrin ECH and 33bisbromomethyloxetane  BBrMO  via  cationic  polymerization  using  BF3-THF  as 
catalyst  and  14-dioxane  as  solvent.  This  synthesis  and  the  characterization  of  the 
copolymer ECHBBrMO have been already published 11. For revision the following 
Table  1  shows  some  properties  of 
the  halogenated  precursor  copolymer 
Table 1 Properties of the halogenated precursor copolymer ECHBBrMO 
results from GPC analysis 
The second step in the synthesis is the nucleophilic substitution reaction for replacing 
the halogen groups by azido groups. This azidation reaction is done with NaN3 using 
DMSO as solvent at 100 C to give the desired copolymer GABAMO. The azidation 
reaction of the copolymer ECHBBrMO has been up-scaled to 1.1 kg.  
The reaction equation for the azidation process can be seen at Figure 1. 
Figure 1 Synthesis of copolymer GABAMO 
Copolymer ECHBBrMO has been synthesized according literature 11. DMSO and 
NaN3 have been used as received from chemical supplier. 
Copolymer ECHBBrMO 1119 g was added to a 30 liter double jacket reactor with 
13 l of DMSO and water 650 ml and heated to 60 C. To this mixture sodium azide 
1233  g  was  added  in  portions  under  stirring.  The  adding  took  about  25  minutes. 
Then the temperature has been increased to 100 C and stirring has been continued 
for 167 h. Then the temperature has been reduced to 60 C and around 15 L of water 
has been added to the reaction mixture under stirring. The copolymer separates from 
the  mixture.  The  aqueous  phase  with  DMSO  NaBr-Cl  and  NaN3-residues  is 
removed and the polymer has been washed with water at a temperature of 60 C five 
times more. Then the copolymer is dried at the rotavapor at 60 C under vacuum to 
give a high viscous dark brown and clear product. Yield 928.2 g copolymer. Waste 
from  washing  operation  aqueous  phase  with  DMSO  NaBr-Cl  and  NaN3-residues 
The water content of the polymer has been measured via Karl-Fischer titration. The 
water  content  was  0.07  .  The  following  Figures  give  some  aspects  from  the 
azidation reaction and from purification. 
Figure 4 Phase separation 
after fourth washing 
operation of copolymer 
liter reactor with DMSO 
Figure 3 Third washing 
operation after azidation 
Figure 5 Copolymer GABAMO at 
the rotavapor for drying  
Figure 6 Copolymer GABAMO at 
the rotavapor  finished drying 
ANALYSIS OF COPOLYMER ECHBBRMO 
IR  spectra  have  been  measured  on  Thermo  Scientific  Nicolet  6700  FTIRSpectrometer with Durascope diamond ATR accessory. 
Molecular weights  have been  measured by GPC  Agilent  Series  1100  with  detector 
DAD  Diode  Array  Detector  Agilent  230  nm  and  a  set  of  four  PSS  SDV  columns 
501001000105 . The solvent was THF and the flow rate was 1.0 mLmin. Polystyrene standards with molecular weights Mp from 162 to 246000 gmol have been 
used for calibration. 
Differential  scanning  calorimetry  DSC  was  done  to  measure  the  glass  transition 
temperature Tg. The measurements were performed on a TA instruments Q 1000 
using  aluminum  pans.  Scans  were  carried  out  on  each  sample  at  scan  rates  of  5 
Cmin under nitrogen flux in the -90 to 25 C range and the result has been taken 
at the second cycle. 
The heat of combustion has been measured with an IKA 2000 calorimeter at sample 
weights of around 1.0 g. 
The  end  groups  have  been  analyzed  via  classical  titration  method  following  the 
procedure  described  in  DIN  53240-2  Determination  of  hydroxyl  value  -  Part  2 
Method with catalyst. The end group analysis has been done with 6 g samples. 
Impact sensitivity of copolymer GABAMO 
The  impact  sensitivity  testing  has  been  done  with  BAM  drop  hammer  apparatus 
following the NATO STANAG 4489. Impact sensitivity of copolymer GABAMO was 
20.0  Nm  5  kg  hammer  0.4  m  height  4  of  6  trials  positive  weak  bang.  With  this 
impact sensitivity copolymer GABAMO is quite insensitive and it can be handled with 
usual precaution for handling of explosives. 
IR-spectroscopy of copolymer GABAMO 
Azidiertes Copolymer
Figure 7 IR spectra of copolymer GABAMO 
The IR-spectra shows the strong azido band at 2093 cm-1 and the broad and wide 
hydroxyl band at 3368 cm-1. The peak at 1100 cm-1 is from the ether bonds. All peaks 
from the halogen vibrations which can be seen at 692 and 745 cm-1 at the IR-spectra 
of the copolymer ECHBBrMO has been disappeared.  
OH-equivalent weight of copolymer GABAMO 
The  hydroxyl  groups  of  the  polymer  have  been  acetylated  and  then  titrated  with 
methanolic  KOH.  From  the  copolymer  three  samples  and  two  blank  samples  have 
been  analyzed  and  the  average  value  has  been  calculated.  The  following  Table  2 
shows the results for the three samples. 
Table 2 Equivalent weight 
of copolymer GABAMO 
Result for sample 2 is clear different from the other 
both  samples.  So  the  average  for  sample  1  and 
sample  3  has  been  calculated.  It  is  3626  gmol. 
This  equivalent  has  been  used  for  calculating  the 
Molecular mass measured via GPC 
From the copolymers ECHBBrMO and GABAMO the molecular masses have been 
measured  via  GPC  method  with  poly-styrene  standards.  Figure  8  shows  the 
molecular weight distribution and Table 3 gives the details for the different molecular 
weight numbers. The molecular weight shows a broad distribution with a high polydispersity D  4.6 and the peaks of the GPC curves shifted from 7618 gmol for the 
halogenated  copolymer  to  11097  for  the  azido  copolymer.  This  shift  to  higher 
molecular mass is due to substitution of the halogens for azide. The amount of low 
molecular mass oligomers is quite low. 
Figure 8 GPC curves of copolymers ECHBBrMO and GABAMO 
Table 3 Molecular weight details for copolymers ECHBBrMO and GABAMO 
DSC of copolymer GABAMO  
The  copolymer  GABAMO  shows  exothermic  decomposition  starting  at  around  180 
C  with  peak  maximum  at  247  C  and  an  energy  release  of  2110  Jg.  Following 
Figure 9 shows the DSC measuring curve. 
Sample 80 CO-Polymer
File XDataDSC80-CO-Polymer.001
Instrument DSC Q2000 V24.10 Build 122
               Figure 9 DSC of copolymer GABAMO 
TGA of copolymer GABAMO 
Universal V4.2E TA Instruments  
Sample 80 CO Polymer
File XDataTGA80-CO-Polymer.002
Instrument TGA Q5000 V3.15 Build 263
                 Figure 10 TGA of copolymer GABAMO 
The copolymer GABAMO shows weight loss from temperatures above 160 C. The 
weight loss occurs in two steps. A fast weight loss of 43 mass- between 190 to 250 
C  and  a  second  slowly  weight  loss  of  34  mass-  between  250  to  600  C.  This 
Universal V4.2E TA Instruments  
decomposition behavior is typical for azido polymers. During the first step of weight 
loss  the  azido  groups  decompose  and  evolve  nitrogen.  At  higher  temperatures  the 
degradation of remaining residues and the polymer backbone occurs. 
Glass transition temperature of copolymer GABAMO 
Sample 80 CO-Polymer
Method HR10 -90C bis 25C cycle
File XDataDSC80-CO-Polymer-Tg.001
Instrument DSC Q2000 V24.10 Build 122
Universal V4.2E TA Instruments  
            Figure 11 Glass transition temperature of copolymer GABAMO 
The  Tg  of  copolymer  GABAMO  lays  at  -52.9  C  which  is  useful  for  propellant 
Density of copolymer GABAMO 
                 Table 4 Density of copolymer GABAMO 
Measuring of density with He-Gas pycnometer at 20C 
The density of copolymer GABAMO is 1.25 gcm and slightly lower than the density 
of GAP which is given with 1.29 gcm 12. 
Viscosity of copolymer GABAMO 
The  viscosity  of  copolymer  GABAMO  has  been  measured  at  three  different 
temperatures at shear rates from 10-1 to 10 s-1. The copolymer shows the behavior 
of a Newtonian fluid at 40 and 60 C. At 20 C the polymer showed reduced viscosity 
at shear rates higher than 10 s-1 thixotropic behavior.  
80 Co-Polymer GA-BAMO 0402 20 C
80 Co-Polymer GA-BAMO 0402 40 C
80 Co-Polymer GA-BAMO 0402 60 C
Figure 12 Viscosity of copolymer GABAMO 
Heat of combustion of copolymer GABAMO 
The  measuring  has  been  done  with  three  samples  and  the  average  heat  of 
combustion was 21923 Jg.  
Table 5 Heat of combustion of copolymer GABAMO 
Elemental analysis of copolymer GABAMO 
Table 6 Elemental analysis of copolymer GABAMO 
Nitrogen  Carbon Hydrogen Sulfur  Oxygen  Balance 
The  elemental  analysis  of  copolymer  GABAMO  shows  unexpected  low  nitrogen 
content.  Our  copolymer  consisting  of  BAMO  and  GA  units  should  have  higher 
nitrogen content than GAP. The BAMO unit has 49.98 mass- nitrogen and the GA 
units  has  42.41  mass-  nitrogen.  During  the  purification  of  the  halogenated 
precursor copolymer ECHBBrMO two side compounds have been identified. These 
were  2-chloromethyl-14-dioxane  as  an  oil  and  crystals  from  25-bischloromethyl14-dioxane.  The  2-chloromethyl-14-dioxane  is  a  reaction  product  built  from  the 
monomer epichlorohydrin and dioxane which was the solvent of the polymerization 
reaction.  From  this  can  be  concluded  that  dioxane  participated  during  the 
polymerization  reaction  and  might  have  been  incorporated  into  the  polymer 
backbone.  This  could  explain  the  low  nitrogen  content.  The  theoretical  elemental 
analysis has been calculated for the following circumstances 
-  25  to  50  g  of  epichlorohydrin  did  not  polymerize  into  the  copolymer 
ECHBBrMO and instead it was removed as 25-bischloromethyl-14-dioxane 
and 2-chloromethyl-14-dioxane  
-  6.0  to  6.5  moles  of  CH2CH2O-  units  from  solvent  dioxane  have  been 
incorporated into the copolymer backbone 
The following Table 7 gives the results for these calculations. From these calculations 
it can be estimated that between 25 to 50 g epichlorohydrin did not polymerize and 
around  6  to  6.5  moles  CH2CH2O  units  from  dioxane  were  incorporated  into  the 
Table 7 Calculated elemental analysis of copolymer GABAMO 
were removed   6.5 mol CH2CH2O 
Carbon Hydrogen  Oxygen 
Copolymer ECHBBrMO in molar ratio of 72.527.5 ECHBBrMO could be azidated 
in 1.1 kg scale successfully. The azido copolymer GABAMO has been characterized 
via IR-spectroscopy thermal analysis DSC TGA Tg impact sensitivity end group 
analysis molecular mass measurement GPC density viscosity heat of combustion 
and  elemental  analysis.  The  original  aim  to  synthesize  a  copolymer  with  higher 
energy  content  than  GAP  could  be  not  reached.  The  copolymer  showed  nitrogen 
content of 35.1  which is lower than the nitrogen content of GAP 42.4 . It seems 
to  be  that  the  solvent  dioxane  participated  in  the  polymerization  and  led  to 
incorporation of CH2CH2O units in the polymer backbone. This reduced the nitrogen 
showed  promising  properties  during 
characterization. The polymer is insensitive against impact has low glass transition 
temperature good functionality and low content of cyclic oligomers which are often 
present  in  polymers  synthesized  from  cationic  polymerization.  The  copolymer  has 
been  evaluated  in  AlAP  based  propellant  successfully.  Future  work  will  focus  on 
better  control  of  the  polymerization  and  the  incorporation  of  CH2CH2O  units  in  the 
ammonium dinitramide 
ammonium perchlorate 
attenuated total reflectance 
Federal Institute for Materials Research and Testing - Berlin 
33-bisazidomethyl-oxetane 
33-bisbromomethyl-oxetane 
boron trifluoride complex with tetrahydrofurane 
polydispersity index of molecular weight 
differential scanning calorimetry 
European Defence Agency 
EDA  project  Formulation  and  Production  of  New  Energetic 
Materials PA No B-0585-GEM2-GC 
glycidyl azide monomer unit of GAP 
glycidyl azide polymer  
gel permeation chromatography 
infrared spectroscopy 
molecular weight number average  
molecular weight at peak maximum 
molecular weight weight average 
poly-epichlorohydrin 
poly-33-bisazidomethyl-oxetane 
poly-ECHBBrMO   poly-epichlorohydrin-r-33-bis-bromomethyloxetane Nitration Chemistry in Continuous Flow using Acetyl Nitrate  
J. Antes W. Janitschek T. Keicher S. Lbbecke 
Fraunhofer-Institut fr Chemische Technologie ICT 
P.O. Box 1240 76318 Pfinztal Germany 
The adoption of Ac2OHNO3 mixtures for aromatic nitrations and the preparation of 
nitric esters have been reported for laboratory and industrial uses 1. This system offers 
the advantage of reduced undesired secondary reactions and selective nitration 
characteristics compared to mixed acid solutions 2 3. 
Ac2OHNO3 mixtures are on the other hand characterized by a certain explosive 
behaviour which is generally ascribed to the formation of acetyl nitrate a species known 
to undergo violent explosions on heating above 333 K 4. More than one accident has 
been recorded in the past in industrial applications of this system 5.  
One way to greatly reduce the potential hazard of Ac2OHNO3 mixtures is to miniaturize 
the synthesis apparatus and auxiliary equipment by employing continuous flow 
chemistry. Continuous flow chemistry is one of the most innovative and rapidly 
developing fields in chemical engineering synthesis and process technology 6-10. 
Continuous flow reactors are mainly characterized by their high surface-to-volume ratio 
and channel diameters in the order of several hundred micrometers which allow the 
running of highly exothermic or hazardous reactions in a safe manner. Indeed the heattransfer rate between the reactor and the surrounding medium can be magnitude of 
orders faster compared to that for a batch reactor 11. 
This paper describes the first results by using acetyl nitrate as nitrating agent for the 
selective nitration of NN-dialkyl substituted ureas in a continuous flow reaction system. 
From macroscopic batch reactions with mixed acid as nitrating agent it is well known 
that always both the mono- and dinitro-substituted products are obtained. With respect 
to a further processing of the nitroureas to the final DNDA plasticizer a quantitative 
synthesis of NN-dialkyl-NN-dinitro-urea is preferably wanted to achieve improved 
energetic properties of the final product.  
The experiments were carried out in batch mode as well as in continuous mode. For the 
batch experiments the reaction was carried out in a reaction calorimeter. The 
instrument used was a RC1 Reaction Calorimeter manufactured by Mettler Toledo 
equipped with a SV01 glass atmospheric pressure reactor 12.  
A mixture of acetic anhydride Ac2O and acetic acid HAc was placed to the SV01 
vessel and salpetric acid was fed linearly over a certain period of time while the 
temperature was maintained at 15C. The mixture was stirred until no heat release was 
detected indicating that the reaction was completed. Then the NN-dimethyl-urea 
dissolved in acetic acid was also fed linearly to the Ac2OHNO3HAc mixture while the 
temperature was also maintained at 15 C. The agitation rate was constant for both 
reaction steps at 700 rpm with the glass propeller stirrer. After this the reaction mixture 
was poured into a water-ice mixture and extracted with CH2CL2. The extract was 
washed with water 5 sodium carbonate and water. The product composition was 
analysed using HPLC FTIR and NMR. 
For the continuous flow experiments the schematic representation of the two step 
nitration of NN-dimethyl-urea is shown in Fig. 1. One single step consisted of a PTFE Tmixing element and a downstream PTFE capillary with an internal diameter of 0.1 mm as 
the reactor. The length of the capillary reactor can be easily adjusted to the needed 
residence time. Syringe pumps were used to avoid any pulsation and thus to ensure 
constant stoichiometric conditions. The outlet from the first step was mixed with the 
third inlet of a solution of acetic anhydride in acetic acid in 2 fold excess to the NNdimethyl-urea. The outlet stream from the second step was quenched directly by 
flowing into stirred ice-water. As mentioned previously the samples collected at the 
outlet were analysed using HPLC.  
Fig. 1 Schematic representation of the two step nitration of NN-diemthyl-urea DMH 
Ac2O Acetic anhydride HAc Acetic acid 
For the batch experiments the reaction was carried out in a reaction calorimeter. Due to 
its ability to provide reaction rate data directly and its in-situ nature reaction 
calorimetry has become one of the most powerful tools for providing kinetic data and 
valuable insights into the reaction.  
The heat flow profile obtained from the RC-1 experiment for the in-situ generation of 
acetyl nitrate as well as the nitration reaction is shown in Fig. 1. Both reactions occurred 
quite rapidly therefore the generation of the acetyl nitrate as well as the nitration 
reaction can be regarded as a feed-controlled reaction system. Even with the shortest 
dosing-time it was not feasible to realize a kinetically controlled reaction regime in the 
batch mode. The reaction rate is determined by the feed-rate of the salpetric acid and of 
the urea respectively.  
Figure 2 Heat flow profile for the in-situ generation of acetyl nitrate first addition as 
well as the nitration reaction of NN-dimethyl-urea second addition. First addition 
100 salpetric acid was added to a mixture of acetic anhydride and acetic acid. Second 
addition NN-dimethyl-urea was added to the Ac2OHNO3HAc mixture at 15C. 
Further experiments were carried out in continuous mode. The schematic representation 
of the two step nitration of NN-dimethyl-urea DMH is shown in Fig. 1. To ensure also 
isothermal conditions at higher flow-rates a two-step configuration was developed to 
spread the released reaction heat over two reaction steps. Due to the in-situ generation 
of the acetyl nitrate in the second step the related concentration of acetyl nitrate is low 
in the reaction mixture. Therefore the hazardous potential of the acetyl nitrate is 
reduced to a minimum. The reaction proceeded smoothly with precise control on the 
reactor system to form the desired NN-dimethyl- NN-dinitro-urea. Yields up to 78  
could be achieved for NN-dimethyl- NN-dinitro-urea. Appropriate conditions were 
found to be 25 min residence time in the first step at 65C and 10 min in the second 
step at 25C. In comparison with mixed acid as nitrating agent mono nitrated products 
could not be found. The HPLC- and 1H-NMR analysis of the isolated product clearly 
indicate that only the NN-dimethyl- NN-dinitro-urea is formed during the nitration 
reaction Fig. 3 and Fig. 4. 
Therefore continuous flow reaction systems turned out to be a suitable tool for the safe 
and highly selective synthesis of NN-dimethyl- NN-dinitro-urea using acetyl nitrate as 
SpinWorks 2.5    Wieland DMDNH 56
file DUsersajADatenNMRaus40fid   expt zg30
transmitter freq. 400.132471 MHz
time domain size 65536 points
width  8278.15 Hz  20.688513 ppm  0.126314 Hzpt
Fig. 3 1H-NMR spectrum of NN-dimethyl- NN-dinitro-urea  
freq. of 0 ppm 400.130000 MHz
processed size 32768 complex points
LB    0.000    GB 0.0000
Fig. xx HPLC chromatogram of NN-dimethyl- NN-dinitro-urea 
NN-dimethyl- NN-dinitro-urea 
Fig. 4 HPLC chromatogram of NN-dimethyl- NN-dinitro-urea 
As a result the developed two step continuous flow reaction system are especially 
predestined for the safe and highly selective synthesis of NN-dimethyl- NN-dinitrourea using acetyl nitrate as nitrating agent. The flow experiment provided only the 
dinitrated product in contrast to the less selectivity by using mixed acid as nitrating 
Nitrations with acetyl nitrate in continuous flow provide a safe alternative to running 
dangerous exothermic reactions in batch and offers increased process safety and 
improvements in product selectivity as well as significant time savings especially in the 
screening of reaction parameters to find the optimal conditions. The refined conditions 
can then be directly translated to the production of larger amounts by increasing the 
flow rate using multiple reactors in parallel andor prolonging the running time of the 
Continuous flow technology can therefore be regarded as a key technology for highly 
selective nitrations using acetyl nitrate as nitrating agent. Moreover one of the great 
benefits of using continuous flow technology besides efficient mixing and increased 
reactor control is the increased run-to-run and reactor-to-reactor reproducibility. This is 
a major concern especially in producing energetic materials.  
1 Houben-Weyl Methoden der organischen Chemie Vol.12 Thieme Stuttgart 757 
2 Augusto J. Rodriguez R. Custodio R. Tetrahedron 55 6733-6738 1999 
3 Megges R. Weiland J. Undeutsch B. Schon R. Steroids 62 762-766 1997 
4 Olah A. G. Malhorta S.C. Narang S.C. Methods and Mechanism VCH Publishers 
5 Bretherick L. Handbook of Reactive Chemical Hazards Butterworths London 1147
1148 1990 
6 Loebbecke S. Antes J. Boskovic D. Krause H. Lutz N. Tuercke T. Schweikert 
W. Analysis and Improvement of Strong Exothermic Nitrations in Microreactors Trans 
7 Roberge D. M. Zimmermann B. Kockmann N. Org. Process Res. Dev. 12 905910 2008 
8 Ley S. V. Baxendale I.R. Chimia 62 162-168 2008 
9 LaPorte T.I. Wang C. Curr. Opin. Drug Discovery Dev. 10 728-745 
10 Geyer K. Codee J.D.C. Seeberger P.H. Chem.-Eur. J. 12 8434-8442 2006 
11 Pelleter J. Renaud F. Org. Process Res. Dev. 13 698-705 2009 
12 Mettler Toledo RC1 Reaction Calorimeter Operating Instructions Switzerland 
November Chap. 2 and 3 1995 Influence of isothermal ageing on the mechanical properties of HTPB-bonded composite rocket propellants expressed as master curves of torsion DMA measurements   
Gnter Mubach Manfred A. Bohn 
Fraunhofer-Institut fuer Chemische Technologie ICT 
Postfach 1240 D-76318 Pfinztal-Berghausen Germany 
guenter.mussbachict.fraunhofer.de 
manfred.bohnict.fraunhofer.de 
Composite  rocket  propellants  CRP  have  an  elastomer  as  binder  for  the  solid  fillers 
which serve as oxidizer and fuel. Elastomers are not linear elastic in behaviour in a way as 
metals or glasses. Their behaviour as function of temperature is named viscoelastic to incorporate the feature of the glass-to-rubber transition in going from low temperatures to 
high temperatures and the so named relaxation phenomenon which invokes considerable 
internal flow characteristics. The distinctive property of the glass-to-rubber or vice versa 
rubber-to-glass  transition  is  a  dissipative  energetic  process  which  causes  the  molecular 
rearrangements from more ordered configuration to more disordered configuration or 
vice versa. The more ordered configuration appears at low temperatures and is called energy elastic as metals and glasses are. The disordered configuration appears beyond the 
glass-to-rubber transition and is called entropy elastic. The modules of viscoelastic materials  are  dependent  on  temperature  and  of  the  deformation  rate.  In  case  of  thermorheological  simple  materials  the  effects  of  time  and  temperature  on  the  material  can  be 
linearly superposed without loss in information. Time and temperature act orthogonal on 
the  material.  This  connection  is  also  the  base  of  the  time-temperature-shift  theorem  according to Williams Landel and Ferry. In other words a distinct correlation between modulus and temperature on one side and modulus and deformation rate on other side exists. 
From measurements at low temperatures the behaviour of the modules can be assigned to 
high deformation rates. One can establish so-named master curves to predict the material 
response at other load situations. Some artificially aged CRP were investigated by torsion 
DMA 1 2. The temperature range was from about 100C to 40C and higher with 
sinusoidal deformation at four frequencies in the range 0.1 to 56 Hz. The material properties storage shear modulus G loss shear modulus G and loss factor tan obtained by 
torsion  DMA  behave  with increasing  deformation rate  according to  the  viscoelasticity  of 
the material. The ageing has distinct influence especially evident in the loss factor curves. 
The master curves and shift factors established from these data show the ageing influence 
in transformed way which can give some insides to better understand the behaviour of the 
materials on the molecular base. 
Keywords  composite  rocket  propellant  ageing  dynamical-mechanical  analysis  shear 
modulus master curves shift factors time-temperature-superposition 
1  Theoretical base 
Mechanical stresses in viscoelastic materials like polymers are at least a function of temperature and strain rate. From experience it is well known that polymers behave mechanically 
in the same way when they are deformed at low strain rates applied at low temperatures com
 
pared to  a situation when they are deformed at high strain  rates applied at high temperatures. 
This principle of equivalence is valid for all mechanical properties like shear modulus G storage  shear  modulus  G  or  loss  shear  modulus  G  since  Ludwig  Boltzmanns  superposition 
principle 3 is applicable. Further work is provided by Ferry 4. 
Fig. 1 Horizontal shift on unaged FMO1 to Tref  5 C 4 frequencies 7 temperatures. 
Fig.  1  shows  some  G  curves  over  four  frequencies  obtained  at  seven  test  temperatures. 
Just  from  looking  on  the  left  graph  one  can  estimate  that  the  curves  can  be  shifted  to  a  socalled  master  curve.  A  horizontal  shift  is  sufficient  when  the  material  belongs  to  the  class  of 
thermo-rheological  simple  materials  5.  The  applicability  of  the  so-called  time-temperaturesuperposition principle is proved by the fact that a smooth master curve can be generated by 
shifting curve sections see the right side of Fig. 1. 
Fig. 2 Master curves of unaged FMO1 material -105 to 24 C 4 frequencies. 
10-210-110010110210310-210-11001011021031x1072x1073x1074x1075x107  20 C 15 C 10 C 5 C 0 C -5 C -10 CFreq. HzaTFMO1horizontal shift of GG Pa10-610-410-21001021041061081010101210141016101810201061071081091010frequency Hz-02000204060810tanGGtanG G PaFMO1 unagedmaster curves Tref  20 CExemplarily a full set of master curves used in this work are shown in Fig. 2. The shift distance for each partial section of the master curve is called shift factor aT see also Fig. 1. Several 
theories to calculate shift factors are known. The two most relevant approaches are the WLFequation and the Arrhenius-equation see Eq. 1 and Eq. 2. 
When  applicable  the  TTS  principle  extends  the  assessable  data  range  as  seen  in  Fig.  1 
DMA data were measured in a frequency range from 0.1 to 30 Hz. The resulting master curve 
generated from frequency sweeps at 7 temperature stages ranges from 0.01 to 100 Hz. 
The  TTS  theorem  is  often  used  to  stretch  the  measurement  range  when  experiments 
would either take very long times or even are impossible with respect to machine restrictions. 
It is suggestive to study ageing mechanisms by the use of TTS. Rheological mechanisms can 
be better understood and the validity of existent theories can be examined. 
The theory of  TTS  is  strictly valid only for ideal materials  which  cannot  be found in  nature. The first aim of the study was to examine whether TTS works for composite rocket propellants  CRP  and  if  so  which  mechanisms  act  restrictive.  When  TTS  is  applicable  the  dependence of the WLF coefficients must be analysed. Moreover the influence of superimposed 
effects like post curing 7 can be studied. 
3  DMA measurement and data generation method 
The  influence  of  ageing  on  the  loss  factor  tan  was  earlier  analysed  for  different  CRPs 
and  a  broad  base  of  ageing  data  exists  at  Fraunhofer  ICT.  Two  typical  CRPs  of  the 
HTPBAPAL family  were chosen and analysed in detail within  this work. These are the AV 
propellants 1 and the FMO propellants 2.  
The material in form of DMA samples was isothermally aged at some temperatures for different storing times under the influence of normal air. DMA measurement with the ARES instrument in torsion mode was made from -100 C to 40 C or 70 C with a temperature increment of 1 K four frequencies were imposed 0.1 1 10 and 30 or 56 Hz. The strain was constant for the samples within  the ageing series. A detailed description of the measurement can 
The loss factor curves of unaged material see Fig. 3 show the main transition regions and 
frequency dependence. The shift of loss factor as a function of frequency indicates viscoelastic 
behavior  of  the  material.  The  second  transition  region  shown  in  Fig.  3  is  only  apparent  for 
some propellants of the FMO family. The AV CRPs behave very similar to the FMO CRPs but 
dont show the hidden transition region evidently. 
Master  curves  were  generated  with  Trios  Software  Version  3.1.0.3538  company  TA  Instruments. Shift settings have been chosen to fit thermo-rheological simple material behaviour. 
Some  iteration  steps  were  necessary  to  find  the  optimal  procedure  to  generate  satisfying  results. The master curves should not only be smooth but also the shift factors should be obtained 
in  the  best  possible  way  to  be  fit  by  the  equations  above  especially  the  WLF-equation 
ref2ref1TTTCTTCalogTTTTREexpTaTarefrefArefTTIt was found that the two CRP families require different shift settings. For the AV family a 
combined  optimization  for  G  and  G  worked  sufficient.  The  master  curves  of  G  and  G 
cannot be obtained by shifting with the same accuracy at the same time. Shifting both of them 
is  a  compromise  chosen  because  then  the  related  shift  factors  were  better  described  by  the 
For the FMO family it was necessary to shift the data sets manually. With data sets up to 
20 temperature steps this is possible but needs a lot of effort. It can be shown that a nearly perfect WLF description of the shift factors can be obtained by manual shift. The software shifting 
option of Trios software works satisfying for the FMO CRP with a combined optimization for 
G G G and tan. In both cases of manually shift or software shift the resulted G and G 
master curves are very smooth at the same time. 
Fig. 3 Loss factor curve of FMO1 with 3 transition regions and a shift due to frequency. 
Initially master curves of G and G were generated from -85 C up to 40 or 70 C. The 
lower temperature level was chosen because below -85 C the WLF description has not worked 
well  which  indicates  rearrangement  processes  which  are  not  conform  to  the  TTS  theory  see 
Fig. 6. Only the software tool is capable of shifting these at least 135 temperature steps reproducible. Some inconsistencies were seen in the master curves at higher frequencies see Fig. 4 
which made it necessary to generate master curves on subsections of the temperature profile of 
DMA measurement. In this manner wrongly arranged curves can be avoided. 
The data shown in Fig. 4 have been smoothed by a LOWESS filter with parameter span 
set to 0.1 implemented in Origin Version 9.1 SR2 OriginLab. The influence of the smoothing 
algorithm  to  the  consistency  of  the  data  was  tested.  Only  in  a  small  frequency  range  starting 
from  the  left  boundary  up  to  approx. 1 Hz  the  smoothing  changes  the  shape  of  the  G  curve. 
The ageing trend seen in the higher frequency range above 1012 Hz cannot be found in the frequency  region  below  100 Hz  where  it  develops  in  exactly  the  other  direction  G  increases 
with ageing in the low frequency range. 
-100-80-60-40-200204000020406083rd transition2nd hidden transitiontemp C 0.1 Hz 1.0 Hz 10 Hz 30 HzFMO1 unaged DMA raw datastrain set to 0.121 tan1st main transitionFig. 4 Systematic ageing trend at higher frequencies which seem not to be real section of a 
master curve generated in temperature range from -85 to 40 C 4 frequencies. Ageing is in 
given storing time at storing temperature at 90 C calculated in 2. 
Finally two temperature ranges were analysed 
-84 to -70 C  Tref  -77 C 
-40 to 0 C  Tref  -20 C. 
In level 1 the observed effect of G-increase correlated with the state of ageing should be studied.  In  level  2  the  influence  of  the  binder-filler-interaction  6  should  be  investigated.  From 
former ageing studies it is known that not always the ageing trend seen in tan curves is the 
same in  the two different  main transition  regions  see Fig.  3. The  ageing  trend in  G and G 
master curves can be compared to the ageing trend in the tan curves. See Fig. 5 to compare 
master curves generated in level 1 and level 2.  
Fig. 5 Comparison of G master curves generated in 2 different temperature regions. 
Following  this  strategy  the  master  curves  of  level  1  consist  of  14  frequency  sweeps.  In 
Level 2 only every fourth temperature step was used for generating the master curve because 
1012101310141015101610x10915x10920x10925x10930x10935x10940x10945x10950x109G Pa 10.4 d 15.7 d 20.0 d 25.0 d 31.0 dfrequency HzAgeing trend FMO1G master curves at higher frequency10-410-310-210-110010110210310410510-410-310-210-11001011021031041051061071081091010 frequency HzGGGGFMO4G and G master curves fromT -84 to -70 C left and T 40 to 0 C rightG G Pared arrows indicateageing trendsTrios has problems to align all 40 frequency sweeps to a smooth master curve. So in level 2 the 
master curves consist of only 11 frequency sweeps. 
4  Description of shift factors 
Shift factors values vs. temperature were delivered by Trios software. Trios is able to analyse and fit the shift factors with Arrhenius and WLF models. For better control of the  curvefitting algorithms OriginPro Version 8.5 company OriginLab was used. Due to shift inaccuracy in  Trios  at  temperature steps around the chosen reference temperature the value of  aT  at 
Tref is  always a bit out  of the WLF-model. Therefore this value of  aT in  all curve fitting sessions for Trios-shifted master curves was left out. 
Fig. 6 TTS Models describing the shift factors obtained during shift 
session shown in Fig. 2. WLF model works satisfying. 
Most of the shift factor curves obtained during several shift sessions can be described with 
WLF-functions. For this reason the change in these curves due to ageing will be analysed by 
the  use  of  the  WLF  model.  The  reference  temperature  seen  in  Fig.  6  is  a  real  temperature 
measured  during  DMA  and  differs  slightly  from  the  idealized  one  shown  in  Fig.  2.  For  all 
curve fitting sessions the measured temperatures have been used to minimize data scattering. 
Due to scattering of measured data which is clearly visible especially from the loss factor 
in Fig. 2 it was not trivial to detect distinct changes in the master curves due to ageing. Many 
master  curves  have  been  produced  for  three  AV  CRPs  and  four  FMO  CRPs.  Two  individual 
propellants AV04 and FMO4 have been chosen to show the change in G and G due to ageing. The analysed samples of AV04 were isothermally aged at 3 storage times for each 3 temperatures namely 60 70 and 80 C. FMO4 was aged at 80 and 90 C with 6 storage times. 
The changes in the moduli shown in the following chapters 5.1 5.2 were all expressed in 
relation  to  increasing sample age. The ageing trends were read out  from the master curves at 
f  10 Hz without use of any smoothing algorithms. 
-120-100-80-60-40-2002040-10-505101520 logaT WLF ArrheniuslogaT -Temp CFMO1 unagedshift factors for master curvefrom T  -105 to 24 C WLF-parametersvaluesigmaC11577211032941C215314759174712Tref-1996205.1  Storage Modulus G 
The  storage  modulus  G  represents  that  part  of  energy  which  is  elastically  transmitted 
from the donor side motor of the DMA machine to the acceptor side. When G grows also the 
Youngs  modulus  E  of  the  sample  increases.  But  there  is  no  universal  correlation  known  between G won from measurements at  low strains like in  the DMA and E. Following table 1 
shows the development of the storage modulus for two CRPs. 
Table 1 Ageing trend of the storage modulus G. 
G  jumps from unaged to 
the first ageing state downwards. For samples aged at 
60 C moderate systematic 
decrease. G curves of samples aged at higher temperatures merge together. 
 decreases strongly from 
the unaged state to the first 
ageing state. From there no 
systematic behaviour. 
 increases with good systematic. 
 increases with very good 
The Behaviour of AV04 and FMO4 is completely different. FMO4 shows good systematic 
for the storage modulus in both temperature levels.  It can be explained by mechanisms which 
lead to  a higher cross-linking density.  AV04 shows  curious behaviour similar to  that seen in 
Fig. 4 which cannot be explained at time. 
5.2  Loss Modulus G 
The loss modulus G represents that part of energy which is dissipated on its way through 
the sample material. The development of the loss modulus is given in table 2. 
Table 2 Ageing trend of the loss modulus G. 
G decreases strongly 
from the unaged state to the 
first ageing state. From there 
no systematic behaviour. 
 decreases slowly with 
moderate systematic. 
 increases with good systematic. 
No  excessive  stretch  of  the  measurement  window  with  respect  to  frequency  was  made 
when  comparing  the  trends  in  Table  1  and  Table  2.  The  development  of  G  is  exemplarily 
shown on FMO4 in Fig. 7. Without interpretation one should notice the change in the ageing 
trend in the level 1 master curves G measured at f  0.1 Hz decreases with ageing whereas it 
increases measured at f  10 Hz. It makes sense to compare again with the tan curve shown 
for FMO1 in Fig. 3. 
Fig. 7 Ageing trend of G of FMO4 in two temperature levels frequency is stretched. This view 
does not expand much the measurement window with respect to frequency.  
Shift factors were obtained applying the  above described method. AV04 has been shifted 
manually in the level 1 region and automatically for G and G by Trios in the level 2 region. 
FMO4 was shifted in both regions automatically for G G G and tan by Trios. The underlying master curves of both the CRPs were constructed from 4 frequencies and 1411 temperatures for level 1level 2. 
It was found that the two coefficients of the WLF equation change in the same manner. It 
is therefore sufficient to show the trend of C1 in Fig. 8 and Fig. 9. Table 3 gives a brief description about the correlation of the WLF coefficient to the ageing state. 
Table 3 Ageing trend of the WLF coefficients C1 and C2. 
 scatter on samples aged at 
80 C polynomial correlation on samples aged at 
 increase with good correlation to age. 
C1 C2  shows polynomial 
correlation for all 3 ageing 
 increase with good correlation to age unaged sample 
out of correlation. 
It was found that in the level 2 region the WLF parameters show a good correlation which 
can  be  described  by  a  linear  function.  AV04  seems  to  be  influenced  by  a  kind  of  chemical 
mechanism which is completed within the first ageing period. It can be seen from Fig. 8 that 
the value C1 of the unaged sample doesnt fit into the trend of the other values. In the level 1 
region the overall trend of C1 for both of the propellants is a decrease. In Fig. 9 one clearly recognizes a kind of polynomial decrease of C1 for the FMO4 samples aged at 90 C. 
10-210-11001011021x1062x1064x1066x1068x1061x1072x10710-210-11001011021x1082x1084x1086x1088x1081x1092x109frequency Hz frequency Hz unaged 12 d 24 d 36 d 48 d 60 d 73 dG PaFMO4G master curves fromT -84 to -70 C left and T -40 to 0 C rightG Pared arrows indicateageing trendsFig. 8 Development of WLF coefficient C1 on the AV04 propellant.  
Fig. 9 Development of WLF coefficient C1 on the FMO4 propellant. 
Additionally to Fig. 8 and Fig. 9 Table 4 shows the range of both the WLF coefficients for 
aged samples of AV04 and FMO4. The coefficients obtained in the level 2 region agree better 
with  those  coefficients  obtained  for  an  overall  master  curve  built  from  temperature  data 
from -105 to 24 C see again the master curve of FMO 1 in Fig. 6. This observation is surprisingly  because  the  overall  master  curve  is  influenced  by  the  main  glass  transition  region  at 
around -70 C but the level 2 region master curve is not under this influence. 
Table 4 Range of the WLF-coefficients. 
138.6  182.3  144.9  180.7 
05010015020025081012141605010015020025068101214161820ageing time d 60 C 70 C 80 CC1 -WLF coefficient C1level 1 Tref  -77 CWLF coefficient C1level 2 Tref  -20 Cageing time dC1 -010203040506070808101214160102030405060708068101214161820ageing time d 80 C 90 CC1 -WLF coefficient C1level 1 Tref  -77 CWLF coefficient C1level 2 Tref  -20 Cageing time dC1 -6  Conclusion and perspective 
The  time-temperature  superposition  principle  works  with  DMA  data  of  the  analysed 
HTPBAPAl propellants in a wide temperature range. It is possible to generate smooth master 
curves of storage and loss modulus by shifting frequency sweeps obtained at several temperature  stages.  The  WLF  model  works  satisfying  starting  from  temperatures  slightly  above  the 
main  glass  transition  temperature  of  the  HTPB-based  binder.  Due  to  very  low  temperatures 
during the measurement the available frequency range generated by TTS is large. 
It  was  found  that  it  is  necessary  to  generate  sub-master  curves  for  smaller  temperature 
ranges  when  looking  on  overall-master  curves  obtained  from  wide  temperature  ranges  like 
100 K. By this methodology one can identify different ageing trends in the development of the 
master curve for different temperature regions. 
All propellants show an unlikely ageing trend in the storage modulus when examining ageing trends from master curves obtained from measurement data in wide temperature ranges. It 
was found that they behave as expected with respect to ageing induced cross-linking processes 
at low deformation rates. The latter manifests as increase in storage modulus with ageing. But 
at  higher  deformation  rates  this  trend  reverses  and  ageing  seems  to  reduce  storage  modulus. 
This  effect  is  seen  not  realistically  and  could  mainly  be  resolved  by  generating  sub-master 
curves.  But  especially  for  AV04  the  unlikely  trend  of  the  storage  modulus  is  maintained  for 
samples aged at 60 C. 
A molecular rearrangement process which was called hidden peak in DMA ageing studies before 1 was found again. The process disturbs the WLF model slightly in the shift factors 
Different CRPs show similar behaviour during shift sessions and during evaluation. Trends 
in  the  change  of  storage  modulus  and  loss  modulus  are  better  correlated  with  the  age  in  the 
WLF-undisturbed  temperature  regions  which  means  for  these  CRP-systems  temperatures 
above -40 C. From observations of the G and G trends one can in general state that increasing age has less influence to material properties at higher deformation rates then at lower deformation rates. 
Every  mechanical  measurement  of  CRP  is  sensitive  to  variations  of  raw  material  properties mixing process casting and curing process and sample preparation procedures. For ageing 
studies all variations must be minimized especially when ageing-analyses by TTS are intended. To be mentioned is here the post-curing effect caused by the existence of residual reactive 
groups of the cross-linking agent. In this study was found that post-curing is detectable also in 
the  trend  of  master  curves.  Nevertheless  a  clear  trend  can  be  found  when  analysing  data 
enough far away from the main glass transition region of HTPB and far away enough from the 
disturbing  effect  caused  by  the  hidden  peak  addressed  above.  An  increase  of  the  WLFparameters C1 and C2 correlated with the sample age is determined. 
Future activities will be optimized DMA re-measurements of some aged samples favourable  from  the  AV04  propellant  which  shows  the  unlikely  behaviour.  The  description  of  the 
WLF-parameters obtained near the glass transition region may become more accurate. Arrhenius-type modelling of loss factor curves gives activation energies which may be compared to 
activation energies obtained by 6. Dielectric spectroscopy may be capable of achieving a situation  comparable  to  high-deformation  rate  processes  necessary  to  analyse  ageing  trends 
there.  It  is  worth  considering  a  comparison  of  the  behaviour  obtained  by  TTS  and  by  tanmodelling  in  the  temperature  region  influenced  by  binder-filler-interaction.  Additionally  the 
TTS-trends obtained in  different temperature regions can be compared to trends in  the tan 
curves.  Finally  the  intersection  point  where  the  ageing  trend  in  the  loss  factor  reverses  obtained for all analysed samples is in terms of micro-molecular understanding worth to be analysed see again Fig. 7. 
List of abbreviations 
ammonium perchlorate 
Advanced Rheometric Expansion System manufactured by former Rheotetric Inc. USA 
name of a series of CRP formulations 
coefficients of the WLF-equation 
composite rocket propellant 
dynamic mechanical analysis 
coefficients of the Arrhenius-equation called activation energy 
name of a series of CRP formulations 
complex shear modulus storage shear modulus loss shear modulus 
hydroxyl terminated polybutadiene 
reference temperature for 1 WLF-equations and 2 master curve 
time temperature superposition 
authors Williams-Landel-Ferry synonym for their theorem 
D-76327 Pfinztal Germany 
marcel.hollerict.fraunhofer.de 
Thomas M. Klaptke Jrg Stierstorfer 
NEW ENERGETIC THERMOPLASTIC ELASTOMERS FOR PRESSED 
Marcel Holler Thomas Keicher Peter Gerber Andreas Happ  
Fraunhofer-Institut fr Chemische Technologie Joseph-von-Fraunhofer-Strae 7  
Department of Chemistry Ludwig-Maximilians University Butenandtstrasse 5-13 
Haus D Room D3.082 D-81377 Munich Germany 
Four  different  energetic  thermoplastic  elastomers  ETPEs  from  glycidyl  azide 
polymer GAP and isocyanates with 22-bisbromomethylpropane-13-diol DAP as 
chain extender were synthesized. It was proven that DAP is a promising monomer in 
ETPE  synthesis  offering  the  opportunity  to  get  elastomers  with  tailored  hard-block 
segments  and  thus  specific  mechanical  properties.  Two  aromatic  diisocyanates  for 
polyaddition  were  explored  and  the  properties  of  the  different  ETPEs  compared.  A 
broad variety of consistency from sticky paste to rubbery flakes could be obtained. 
One  specific  ETPE  was  chosen  and  characterized  by  means  of  temperaturedependant viscosity. A PBX formulation based on HMX and TEX was developed and 
two formulations one with ETPE as energetic binder and another one with paraffin 
wax  as  inert  binder  were  manufactured.  Pressing  of  cylindrical  compacts  yielded 
explosive charges with  97  TMD. Characterization of explosive properties shows 
that  PBX  with  ETPE  binder  has  comparable  detonation  velocity  but  significantly 
increased  detonation  pressure  compared  to  PBX  with  inert  binder.  Gap-test 
determined equal shock wave sensitivity of both PBX at 20.4 kbar GO  17.2 kbar NoGO.  
To  improve  safety  performance  processability  and  mechanical  strength  plasticbonded explosives PBX were developed. In these formulations explosive particles 
are incorporated in polymeric binder systems and optional plasticizer. The concept is 
to encapsulate each explosive crystal in a layer of binder so that the binder acts as 
adhesive  while  at  the  same  time  separates  particles  from  each  other.  This  way 
accidental hot spot generation by friction or shear forces between the particles can 
be  prevented  and  the  binder  acts  as  cushion  for  shock  and  impact  compression 
especially when an elastomeric binder is used. Additionally huge forces acting on an 
explosive charge in ammunition while being shot out of a gun can be attenuated by 
fulfill  performance  requirements  which 
an  elastomeric  system.  By  adjusting  the  composition  and  choice  of  binder  and 
plasticizer  explosive  charges  of  arbitrary  dimensions  and  desired  mechanical 
strength  can  be  formed  from  rigid  pressings  to  rubbery-elastic  explosive  sheets. 
However  blending  energetic  materials  with  non-energetic  binder  systems  leads  to 
dilution of explosive energy and high levels of explosive loading are needed to fulfill 
given  performance  requirements.  In  the  1950s  research  and  development  of 
energetic binders derived from energetic polymers was intensified. Contrary to inert 
binders they liberate energy upon decomposing and contribute to the performance of 
an energetic formulation. This way lower fractions of explosive solid filler are needed 
lower  sensitivity  and  allow  softer 
An obvious candidate in this area is nitrocellulose NC first discovered in the 19th 
century  and  to  this  day  extensively  used  for  small  rocket  engines  and  gun 
propellants.  However  NC  shows  several  undesirable  mechanical  properties  that 
could not be improved properly and hence no acceptable NC-based binder system 
for explosives could be developed 1. 
To  obtain  modern  energetic  polymers  functional  groups  such  as  nitro  nitrato  or 
azido moieties are introduced into the polymer backbone. A series of polyether-based 
energetic polymers were developed and one type based on epichlorohydrin emerged 
over time. Incorporation of an azide functionality into the former led to poly-glycidyl 
azide commonly described as glycidyl azide polymer GAP. Functionalities at the 
end  of  the  GAP  chains  can  be  adjusted  by  different  initiators  and  additives  in  the 
polymerization yielding one or more hydroxyl groups on each end which can further 
react  with  isocyanate  curing  agents  in  curing  1  2.  So  GAP  can  be  used  in  cast 
cured  formulations  but  also  for  the  processing  of  ETPE-based  propellants  and 
explosives.  Thermoplastic  elastomers  are  a  class  of  polymers  that  contain  hard 
crystalline  and  soft  amorphous  segments  fig.  1.  Reversible  interactions  like 
hydrogen bonding or dipole-dipole 
association  and  formation  of  rigid 
domains  that  are  responsible  for 
contrast  soft  segments  exhibit 
less interaction among each other 
immiscible  with  hard 
separation  occurs.  The 
segment  matrix  provides  certain 
elasticity to the overall system 3. 
The soft domains in thermoplastic 
Figure 1 Schematic representation of the twophase elastomeric system in polyurethanes 1. 
hydroxyl-terminated polyethers. Cross-linking with isocyanates builts urethane groups 
that  form  rigid  segments  interacting  via  hydrogen  bonding  and  VAN-DER-WAALs 
forces. Short polyvalent alcohols e.g. BDO or pentaerythritol are typically used as 
chain extenders. They increase the size of rigid domains and are capable of building 
a  3-dimensional  lattice.  The  physical  properties  of  the  final  ETPE  depend  on  the 
chain  length  of  prepolymers  the  choice  of  an  appropriate  isocyanate  curing  agent 
and  chain  extender  as  well  as  the  ratio  of  isocyanate  to  hydroxyl  groups.  Using 
energetic  polyethers  like  GAP  as  soft  block  prepolymers  energetic  thermoplastic 
elastomers ETPEs can be synthesized. As stated above ETPEs are extraordinarily 
suitable as binders for explosives. Common diisocyanates used for curing ETPEs are 
shown  in  figure  2.  Steric  and  electronic  effects  lead  to  substantial  differences  in 
reactivity between the isocyanate groups not only comparing different molecules but 
also  different  sites  in  the  same  molecule.  This  fact  is  important  to  evaluate  curing 
time and completion of the reaction. 
Figure 2 Common diisocyanate curing agents. 
The  synthesis  of  polyurethanes  is  typically  catalyzed  by  organotinIV  compounds 
the most prominent being dibutyltin dilaurate DBTL 4.  The reaction can be carried 
out in various solvents or in bulk. Since isocyanates are quite reactive towards water 
and other hydroxides reactants as well as reaction atmosphere must be thoroughly 
freed from residual water and alcoholic solvents. 
To be used in energetic formulations ETPEs should fulfill the following requirements 
  Melting temperature in the range of 70 to 120 C 
  Low melt viscosity 
  Glass transition temperature below -50 C 
  Physical and chemical compatibility with other ingredients of an explosive     
formulation and the casing 
  High thermal stability 
  Low sensitivity towards unintended stimuli 
  Easy handling and processing 
The variety of energetic prepolymers cross-linking agents and chain extenders offers 
building blocks with manifold possibilities to design ETPEs for different purposes 3 
5. Diaz et al. investigated the mechanical and thermal properties of ETPEs based on 
GAP as a function of polyol chain extender and diisocyanate 6. In their work inert 
straight  chain  diols  with  four  five  and  six  carbon  atoms  were  used  as  chain 
The  motivation  of  this  work  was  to  synthesize  and  fully  characterize  a  GAP-based 
ETPE with DAP as chain extender suitable as binder for high performance pressed 
explosive charges. A new PBX formulation based on this ETPE was to be processed 
and  characterized  and  its  processing  should  be  optimized  to  yield  high  quality 
pressed  charges.  Ideally  the  resulting  explosive  charges  should  exhibit  sensitivity 
characteristics that allow their use in Insensitive Munitions IM applications. 
All  energetic  thermoplastic  elastomers  were  obtained  by  solution  polymerization  of 
GAP-diol with two different diisocyanates and with 22-bisazidomethylpropane-13diol  DAP  as  chain  extender.  Its  structure  with  five  carbon  atoms  and  two 
symmetrically  arranged  azidomethyl  moieties  resembles  the  repeating  unit  of  the 
energetic  polymer  poly-BAMO.  The  nitrogen  content  of  45.1    ensures  energetic 
properties while two chemically equal primary hydroxyl functions provide nucleophile 
sites that can react with polyisocyanates to build up macromolecular structures. DAP 
has  been  synthesized  following  a  modified  method  described  by  Siebert  et  al. 
Scheme 1 Synthesis of DAP 2 
GAP-diol  was  purchased  from  SME  France  with  the  following  analytical  data 
obtained by GPC in THF  
Table 1 Analytical data of GAP-diol 
Equivalent weight per 
Dry  THF  was  chosen  as  solvent  since  it  does  not  react  with  any  of  the  molecules 
used dissolves most of them readily and is easy to remove by evaporation. Dibutyl 
tin dilaurate DBTL was used as catalyst. 
The  composition  and  ratio  of  building  blocks  is  shown  in  table  2.  TDI  and  paraphenylene diisocyanate PDI were chosen as diisocyanate because their molecular 
structure  allows  them  to  interact  intermolecularly  in  the  finished  polymer  via  stacking interactions building rigid hard segments. PDI is solid at room temperature 
and has a much lower vapor pressure than TDI making it safer to handle. Table 2 
shows the composition of the synthesized ETPEs 10 g were synthesized each. All 
components were thoroughly dried prior to use and the polymerization was catalyzed 
Table 2 Composition of ETPEs mass- 
Since DAP TDI and GAP are readily soluble in THF no cosolvents were needed and 
the reaction mixture from ETPE 4 and 5 remained clear. In the synthesis of ETPE 6 
and  7  PDI  dissolved  gradually  and  the  reaction  mixtures  remained  turbid  over  the 
complete  reaction  time.  Progress  of  the  polymerization  was  monitored  by  IRspectroscopy  of  the  reaction  mixture.  Decay  of  the  asymmetric  NCO  stretching 
vibration at 2270 cm-1 and growth of the carbonyl CO stretching band at 1279 cm-1 
indicate  the  process  of  the  reaction.  The  complete  conversion  of  isocyanates  to 
urethanes was observed after 48 hours. 
Figure 3 shows the resulting polymers. ETPE 4 is a paste whereas ETPE 5 is a firm 
kneadable clear rubber. Only ETPE 4 and ETPE 5 are totally clear indicating a lack 
of  large  crystalline  areas  in  the  polymers.  As  expected  the  polymers  synthesized 
with PDI are turbid and more viscous compared to their TDI-analoga. ETPE 6 is a 
sticky  paste  with  higher  viscosity  than  ETPE  4.  ETPE  7  was  obtained  as  rubbery 
flakes that are not sticky. The different physical properties can be explained by the 
formation of more rigid hard-block domains in the elastomer PDI forms symmetrical 
rod-like molecule that can form strong interactions among each other. TDI in contrast 
is more bulky since the second isocyanate-group is meta-oriented to the first and the 
methyl group makes TDI more bulky. As described in literature PDI forms hard block 
segments with increased crystallinity as compared to TDI 8. 
No specific trend is observable in thermal behavior as glass transition points are in 
the close range of -34.9 to -35.4 C and decomposition begins at 214 - 215 C. All 
DAP-based  polymers  are  not  sensitive  towards  friction  as  they  do  not  show  any 
reaction up to 360 N. Both PDI-cross linked ETPEs have a shock sensitivity of 15 J 
whereas TPE 1 is slightly more 12.5 J and ETPE 5 less 25 J sensitive. 
Figure 3 Images of DAP-based ETPEs 
Based on previous unpublished investigations in our workgroup ETPE 5 was chosen 
for scale-up and further processing. A second batch of 100 g was synthesized and 
analyzed. Interestingly the scaled-up polymer has almost twice the weight-average 
molecular  mass  and  polydispersity  compared 
the  small-scale  synthesis. 
Accordingly it forms a slightly more rigid rubber. These differences can be explained 
by an inadvertently incorporation of a slight excess of TDI thus increasing the ratio of 
isocyanate to alcohol groups which leads to more cross-links in the final polymer. 
ETPE  5  was  characterized  in  terms  of  dynamic  mechanical  analysis  employing  an 
oscillating rheometer with a frequency of 1 Hz over a temperature range from - 40 to 
 90 C. Storage and loss modulus are shown in figure 4. The moduli drop a factor of 
1000 in the glass transition region between -30 C and -10 C and merges to a linear 
rubbery region up to 90 C. The absence of rubbery flow and liquid flow regions is a 
sign of the semi cristallinity of the ETPE and the slope indicates that only a moderate 
degree of cross-linking is present. No melting point can be seen. 
Figure 4 Temperature dependant storage- blue and loss modulus red of ETPE 5  
Heat  of  combustion  of  scaled-up  ETPE  5  was  determined  by  bomb  calorimetric 
measurements to be -20.68 kJg. Elemental analysis gives an empirical formula for 
100 g ETPE 5 of C3.30H4.69N2.69O1.19. 
MANUFACTURE AND PROCESSING OF PBX 
To investigate the suitability of GAP- and DAP-based binder for pressed charges a 
PBX formulation was designed and manufactured. The concept of the following PBX 
design  is  inspired  by  the  work  of  AUER  et  al.  who  describe  a  bimodal  system  of 
coarse HMX particles that are mixed with a fine insensitive explosive e.g. TATB 9. 
The authors describe that coating sensitive HMX with an insensitive additive leads to 
pressed charges with high explosive power and low sensitivity against shock waves. 
For  this  work  TEX  was  used  as  insensitive  component  besides  HMX  as  main 
explosive.  TEX  or  410-dinitro26812-tetraoxa-410-diazatetracyclo-dodecane  fig. 
5  is  a  highly  strained  heterocyclic  nitramine  which 
was  first  described  by  BOYER  in  1990.  It  is  easily 
accessible  by  two-step  synthesis  and  offers  high 
density and detonation velocity. Structurally related to 
CL-20 it offers less explosive power however is a lot 
less sensitive towards external stimuli 10. 
Table  3  lists  the  particle  sizes  of  materials  used.  To 
obtain  pressed  charges  with  maximum  density 
particle size distribution was optimized by maximizing 
the tap density of mixtures with varying ratio of coarse and fine particles. TEX-content 
was  selected  to  be  in  a  range  of  between  4  and  5  mass-.  As  starting  point  a 
bimodal  mixture  of  HMX  particles  was  investigated  and  their  maximum  tap  density 
was found at a mass ratio of 77.5  coarse and 22.5  fine particles. After addition 
of  TEX  fine-tuning  of  particle  ratio  to  maximize  density  led  to  the  particle  ratio 
described in table 3. 
Table 3 Particle sizes and ratio in PBX 
0.5    graphite  was  added  to  the  formulation  since  it  reduces  sensitivity  against 
electrostatic  discharge  and  acts  as  lubricant  while  pressing.  Two  PBXs  were 
manufactured and tested  one  with  energetic  binder PBX 2  and  one  with  paraffin 
wax with a melting range of 57  60 C PBX 1 as inert binder to compare explosive 
and  sensitivity  characteristics.  ETPE  5  was  chosen  as  energetic  binder  since  its 
elasticity  and  physical  properties  seemed  to  make  it  the  most  suitable  of  all 
synthesized ETPEs for pressed charges. Binder content in each PBX was 4 . Table 
4 shows the overall formulation of the manufactured PBXs.  
Table 4 Formulation of PBXs used. 
Each  PBX  was  manufactured  by  filling  the  solid  contents  into  a  horizontal  kneader 
and adding a solution of binder in petroleum ether PBX 1 or ethyl acetate PBX 2. 
After  intensive  kneading  and  removal  of  the  solvent  grey  molding  powders  were 
obtained.  REM  micrographs  were  made  to  examine  coating  and  agglomeration  of 
particles. In the micrographs of PBX 1 fig. 6 a substantial amount of free surfaces 
of HMX crystals is visible which shows that paraffin wax does not coat the surface of 
HMX  properly.  The  adhesiveness  is  not  satisfactory  so  that  agglomeration  hardly 
occurs  and  isolated  small  particles  probably  TEX  and  paraffin  wax  can  be  seen 
between coarse HMX particles. Crystals exhibit sharp corners and edges. In contrast 
the micrographs of PBX 2 fig. 7 show a number of large agglomerates with hardly 
any  bare  fine  particles  in  between.  All  particles  have  rough  surfaces  and  smooth 
rounded  corners  and  edges.  The  superior  adhesiveness  of  ETPE  5  leads  to 
Figure 6 REM Micrographs of PBX 1           Figure 7 REM Micrograph of PBX 2 
completely coated particles that stick together in clusters up to 4 times larger than 
those in PBX 1. Smoothing of corners and edges results from binder coating but also 
from the fact that ethyl acetate is capable of dissolving minimal amounts of HMX and 
thus  rounds  the  particles.  From  the  viewpoint  of  processing  round  particles  are 
favorable in pressing because they flow better and less particles are cracked when 
pressure is applied. 
With a value of 6 J PBX 2 exhibits moderate sensitivity against shock whereas PBX 
1  does  not  show  reaction  at  impact  energies  below  15  J.  Both  are  almost  equally 
sensitive towards friction with 240 N PBX 1 and 288 N PBX 2. Stability at elevated 
temperatures and in vacuo were determined according to STANAG 4491 11. Auto 
ignition  measured  with  heating  rate  of  5  Cmin  occurred  in  both  samples  at  a 
temperature of 254 C. Dutch weight-loss tests as well as vacuum stability tests show 
that  both  PBXs  are  chemically  stable  and  that  no  unwanted  dangerous  reactions 
between  the  ingredients  occur  making  them  safe  for  long-time  storage.  The 
theoretical  maximum  density  of  PBX  1  and  2  was  calculated  from  the  particle  size 
ratios according to methods described by GERBER 12. PBX 1 has a TMD of 1.803 
gcm3 compared to 1.872 gcm of PBX 2 due to the higher density of ETPE 5. 
The  plastic-bonded  explosives  described  above  were  processed  to  cylindrical 
charges  using  a  two-sided  remote  operated  hydraulic  press.  The  cylinders  were 
specified to be 21 mm in height and to have a diameter of 21 mm. Optimum press 
capacity  was  determined  in  preliminary  tests  where  press  capacity  was  increased 
until no substantial increase in density could be obtained. For both molding powders 
a press capacity of 87 kN 2.5 kbar was chosen. 
The compacts of both PBXs have a high density compared to their TMD with 99.2  
PBX  1  and  97.4    PBX  2.  The  strength  of  the  cylinders  was  compared  by  the 
amount of force needed to manually break them in half with a tool. PBX 1 cylinders 
are relatively brittle and break by application of moderate force whereas intense effort 
is  needed  to  break  PBX  2  charges  which  have  a  slightly  higher  Shore-hardness 
CHARACTERIZATION OF EXPLOSIVE PROPERTIES  
To investigate explosive performance of pressed charges combined VOD- and platedent  tests  were  conducted  with  two  samples  for  each  PBX.  The  charges  were 
constructed of 19 compacts enclosed in cardboard tube yielding an overall length of 
40 cm. 12 coaxial sensors were placed in the central part of the charge and ignition 
was ensured by a standardized 21 mm HWC booster. A massive ST37 steel witness 
plate was used to determine plate-dent test values. Sensitivity towards shock waves 
was determined by a modified small-scale test according to STANAG 4488 instead 
of  water  PMMA  disks  were  used  as  attenuator  13.  Detonation  pressures  were 
obtained  from  gap  height  with  a  calibration  curve.  Test  results  are  summarized  in 
Table 10 Test results of explosive characterizations. 
It can be seen that both formulations have almost equal VODs. The formulation with 
inert  binder  is  slightly  faster  than  the  one  with  energetic  binder  probably  resulting 
from the lower density obtained in pressing. As indicated by the dent depth produced 
in  the  steel  witness  plate  PBX  2  develops  a  significantly  higher  brisance  and 
detonation pressure but in lieu of a calibration curve no absolute values in kbar can 
be given. Both formulations exhibit the same sensitivity towards shock waves. PBX 2 
was expected to be less sensitive because of its elastic binder which should cushion 
incoming  shock  waves  to  a  certain  extent.  Increased  binder  content  is  probably 
needed for this effect to fully set in. 
Apparatus and analysis 
All  reagents  were  purchased  from  commercial  sources  and  were  if  not  otherwise 
stated used as is. HMX was purchased from Dyno Nobel. TEX was purchased from 
Synthesia. GAP-Diol was purchased from SNPE. Infrared spectra were measured on 
a  Thermo  Scientific  Nicolet  6700  FT-IR  using  a  Durascope  Diamond  ATR  unit.  A 
DSC Q1000 by TA instruments was used for DSC measurements. TGA was done on 
a  TGA  Q  5000  by  TA  Instruments.  Elementary  analysis  was  performed  on  an 
Elementar varioEL cube. Melting points were determined on a Bchi Melting Point B540. Particle Size analysis was done on a Malvern Mastersizer 2000. 1H and 13C
NMR  spectra  were  obtained  on  a  Bruker  Advance  400  spectrometer  at  ambient 
temperature calibrated on residual solvent signals. The spectra were recorded at 400 
MHz  for  1H  respectively  100  MHz  for  13C  resonance.  Rheology  data  were 
determined  with  an  Anton  Paar  MCR  501  rheometer.  Calorimetric  measurements 
were performed with an IKA C 2000 combustion calorimeter. A Zeiss Supra 55 VP 
was used to obtain SEM micrographs. Densities were measured on a Quantachrome 
Ultrapycnometer  1000T.  Shock  sensitivity  was  measured  on  a  BAM  Fallhammer 
according to NATO STANAG 4489 14 friction sensitivity was determined via a BAM 
friction apparatus according to NATO STANAG 4487 15. Sensitivity against shock 
waves was measured with a modified GAP-test according to NATO STANAG 4488 
13.  Vacuum  thermal  stability  VTS  automatic  explosion  temperature  AET  and 
dutch  weight  loss  test  were  performed  according  to  NATO  STANAG  4491  11. 
Detonation velocity was measured with an array of 12 coaxial sensors and recorded 
by  an  oscilloscope.  Tap  densities  were  characterized  via  an  Engelsmann  STAV  II 
volumeter.  Explosive  formulations  were  mixed  and  kneaded  in  a  remote-operated 
IKA  Duplex  HKD  25  horizontal  kneader.  Pressing  was  performed  with  a  remoteoperated Hydrap HS 125 two-sided hydraulic press.  
Synthesis of 22-bisazidomethylpropane-13-diol 2
22-bisbromomethylpropane-13-diol 50.00 g 191 mmol were dissolved in 200 ml 
DMF.  Under  continuous  stirring  sodium  azide  49.61  g  763  mmol  were  added 
gradually.  The  reaction  mixture  was  heated  to  120  C  and  refluxed  for  24  h.  After 
cooling to room temperature the formed precipitate was filtered off and washed with 
30 ml DMF. 100 ml ethyl acetate were added to the filtrate and water was added until 
phase separation occurred. The mixture was extracted with ethyl acetate 5 x 100 ml 
and the combined organic phases were washed once with 20 ml water. The organic 
phase  was  dried  over  MgSO4  and  evaporated.  Solvent  residues  were  removed  by 
drying over 24 h with an oil vacuum pump at elevated temperatures. After standing at 
room temperature for one day the resulting oil solidified to yield 2 as off-white oily 
crystals 25.53 g 130.3 mmol 72 .  
1H NMR CDCl3  ppm  3.62 d J4.3 Hz 4 H 3.42 s 4H 2.82 s 2H.  
13C NMR CDCl3  ppm  63.4 51.6 44.8.  
IR  cm1 rel. int.  3219 m 2943 w 2925 w 2101 vs 1461 w 1441 m 
1382 w 1361 m 1273 m 1219 w 1145 w 1047 m 1030 s 1007 m 944 
Elementary  analysis  C5H10N6O2  calc  C  32.26  H  5.41  N  45.14  O  17.19. 
Found C 31.98 H 5.46 N 43.96.  
Mass spectrometry mz DEI 187.2 MH 159.2 MH-2N 129.2 M-4N 98.2 
Melting point 32.0 C.  
Sensitivities Friction 324 N Impact 25 J.  
DSC onset 5 C min-1 TDec 198.2 C. 
Scaled-up synthesis of ETPE 5  
GAP diol 74.993 g 31.78 mmol was diluted in 300 ml dry THF. A solution of DAP 
10.064  g  54.06  mmol  in  50  ml  THF  was  added.  Toluenediisocyanate  14.944 
85.89 mmol and 0.4 ml of DBTL were added. The reaction mixture was stirred under 
nitrogen atmosphere for 48 h the solvent evaporated and the resulting gel dried in a 
vacuum oven for 2 days. ETPE 5 was obtained as clear yellowish highly viscous gel.  
1H NMR CDCl3  ppm  7.78 br. s. 4.99 br. s. 4.06 br. s. 3.17 - 3.81 m 
2.86 s 2.55 s 2.12 br. s. 1.73 - 1.81 m 1.64 s 1.18 s.  
13C NMR CDCl3  ppm  78.7 69.6 51.7 41.0.  
IR  cm1 rel. int.  3324 w 2922 w 2875 w 2091 vs 1732 m 1600 w 
1532 m 1445 w 1277 m 1221 m 1113 m 1065 m 1000 w 936 w 900 
w 818 w 764 w 668 w.  
DSC onset 5 C min-1 TDec 214.5 C Tg -31.5 C.  
Elementary analysis calc C 41.36 H 4.78 N 37.06. Found C 39.61 H 4.73 N 
Sensitivities Friction 360 N Impact 17.5 J. 
Four different ETPEs with DAP as chain extender were synthesized. It was proven 
that DAP is a promising monomer in ETPE synthesis offering the opportunity to get 
thus  specific  mechanical 
properties.  Two  aromatic  diisocyanates  for  polyaddition  were  explored  and  the 
properties of the different ETPEs compared. It was shown that choice of diisocyanate 
as well as DAP-content influences the physical properties of the polymers. A broad 
variety of consistency from sticky paste to rubbery flakes could be obtained. Further 
research is required to get polymers with glass transition points low enough to fulfill 
NATO STANAG requirements since the values obtained in ETPEs with DAP chain 
extender are around -35 C. 
One  specific  ETPE  was  chosen  and  characterized  by  means  of  temperaturedependant  viscosity.  A  PBX  formulation  based  on  HMX  was  developed  and  two 
formulations one with ETPE as energetic binder and another one with paraffin wax 
as  inert  binder  were  manufactured.  Investigation  by  means  of  REM  micrography 
showed that ETPE 5 has superior characteristics  in  coating  and agglutinating solid 
particles in the molding powder.  Pressing  of  cylindrical  compacts  yielded  explosive 
charges with  97  TMD. Characterization of explosive properties shows that PBX 
with  ETPE  binder  has  comparable  detonation  velocity  but  significantly  increased 
detonation  pressure  compared  to  PBX  with  inert  binder.  Further  optimization  of 
pressing  parameters  should  yield  ETPE-bound  pressed  charges  with  higher  TMD 
and maximum VOD. Gap-test determined equal shock wave sensitivity of both PBX 
at 20.4 kbar GO  17.2 kbar No-GO. Increasing the binder content in ETPE bound 
tailored  hard-block  segments  and 
attenuated total reflectance 
Federal Institute for Materials Research and Testing - Berlin 
33-bisazidomethyl-oxetane 
differential scanning calorimetry 
energetic thermoplastic elastomer 
glycidyl azide polymer 
1357-tetranitro-1357-tetrazinane   
infrared spectroscopy 
coupling constant NMR Joule sensitivity  
medium IR multiplett NMR  
mass per charge MS  
plastic bonded explosive  
parts per million NMR  
135-trinitro-triazinane  
strong IR singlet NMR  
Standardization agreement  
triaminotrinitrobenzene  
410-dinitro26812-tetraoxa-410-diazatetracyclo-dodecane  
glass transition temperature  
thermogravimetric analysis 
theoretical maximum density  
PBX should increase the elasticity of explosive charges to cushion incoming shock 
waves resulting in less shock-sensitive charges. FORMATION OF SUBMICRON-SIZED CYCLOTRIMETHYLENE TRINITRAMINE 
Yong-Soo Cho1 Keun-Deuk Lee1 Sang-Keun Han2 Jae-Eun Lee3 Jun-Woo Kim3 Kee-Kahb Koo3 
1 Agency for Defense Development Daejeon Republic of Korea 
2 Hanwha Research and Development Center Daejeon Republic of Korea 
3 Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering Sogang University Seoul Republic of Korea 
Keywords cyclotrimethylene trinitramine and drowning-out 
In  the  crsytallization  of cyclotrimethylene  trinitramine  by  drowning  out  from  the  acetonewater  system 
submicrometer-sized particles were successfully produced and polyvinylpyrrolidone PVP was found to 
act as a nucleation promoter and growth retarder. The operating parameters such the spraying distance of 
solution solute concentration and temperature were found to influence strongly on the particle size. It was 
shown  that  there  was  an  optimum  distance  due  to  incomplete  atomization  and  coalescence  among 
fluttered  droplets.  Aslo  there  was  an  optimum  concentration  for  the  formation  of  submicrometer-sized 
particles owing to that nucleation and final size of crystals are dependant on the concentration of solution 
droplets.  Lower  temperature  of  solution  induces  faster  nucleation  procuces  the  small-sized  particles. 
However too low temperature  was found to  increase in coalescence among atomized droplets inducing 
Explosives  require  a  careful  handling  because  of  a  lot  of  unintended  accidents  during  peace  time  as 
well as war the USS Forrestal fire in 1967 and the Camp Doha fire at Kuwait in 1991 causing damage of 
property and human life 1. It is important to reduce friction and impact sensitivity of those with no loss 
of performance for preventing those serious accidents and the subsequent loss of human life and cost for 
the  restoration  2.  The  ignition  or  explosion  of  explosives  is  induced  by  potential  hot  spots  which  are 
inclusions voids or internal defects of crystal. The impact makes the potential hot spots into hot spots and 
these  cause  explosion.  Size  reduction  into  nano-  or  submicrometer  scale  can  be  an  effective  method 
because most inclusions have micrometer scales 3. Many studies on relationship between sensitivity and 
crystal  size  show  that  smaller  explosive  particles  have  less  sensitivity  and  it  is  still  valid  for  the 
submicrometer-scale  cyclotrimethylenetrinitramine  particles 
this  work  drowning-out 
crystallization  of  cyclotrimethylenetrinitramine  was  carried  out  by  drowning-out  with  the  addition  of 
polyvinylpyrrolidone  PVP.  The  effect  of  the  operating  parameters  such  as  spray  distance  antisolvent 
temperature and concentration of cyclotrimethylenetrinitramine on the final crystal size was investigated.  
Experimental section 
Materials.  Cyclotrimethylenetrinitramine  99.9  was  supplied  by  Hanwha  Co.  Daejeon  Korea  and 
was used without further purification. Acetone 99.5 and triple-distilled water were used as a solvent 
and antisolvent respectively. PVP K30 MW 40000 was bought from Tokyo Chemical Industry Japan.  
Drowning-out crystallization. The experimental equipment for drowning-out crystallization is comprised 
of two vessels a 200 mL stainless steel jacketed solution reservoir with a spray nozzle and a 2 L glass 
jacketed  crystallizer  with  antisolvent.  The  temperature  of  each  vessel  was  individually  controlled  by  a 
thermostat. The antisolvent water was stirred with an impeller at 150 rpm. The solution was sprayed by a 
spray nozzle Spray Systems Company Unijet  650025 USA orifice diameter 0.33 mm. The spraying 
position was fixed at a location 3.15 cm away from the stirring shaft. Spraying of the solution into water 
was conducted by compressed nitrogen gas with pressure of 20 bar. 
Results and discussion 
As shown Fig. 1 the average size of cyclotrimethylenetrinitramine crystals decreased with increasing 
spray distance when it is smaller than 3.7 cm. It was well known that a target solution is sprayed through 
nozzle  with  the  form  of  a  liquid  film  and  then  it  splits  to  atomized  droplets  by  equilibrium  between 
surface tension and inertia force 5. If the spray distance were not enough the solution  is not atomized 
and reaches the surface of antisolvent in the form of a liquid film which leads to formation of relatively 
large particles. On the other hand the flutter of droplets occurred by air resistance  at the spray distance 
larger than 3.7 cm inducing a coalescence of droplets and a formation of large particles.  
Figure 1. SEM images of cyclotrimethylenetrinitramine particles obtained with the spray distances of a 2.5 b 3.7 
and  c  4.9  cm.  The  crystallizer  temperature  293.15  K  cyclotrimethylenetrinitramine  concentration  3.5  g100g 
In general a crystal size is limited to atomized droplet when the nucleation occurred before complete 
mixing between the solution and  the antisolvent and tends to be smaller as the concentration decreases. 
However  it  was  found  that  the  crystal  size  of  the  product  increases  with  decreasing  concentration  of 
cyclotrimethylenetrinitramine  in  the  concentration  range  smaller  than  5.0g100g  acetone  as  shown  in 
Fig. 2. This can be explained by the reason that nucleation is not induced until the solution droplets are 
comlpetely mixed with antisolvent at a low solute concetnration. 
images  of  cyclotrimethylenetrinitramine  obtained  with 
the  cyclotrimethylenetrinitramine 
concentrations of a 2.0 b 3.5 c 5.0 and d 6.5g100g acetone. The crystallizer temperature 293.15 K  the 
spray distance 3.7 cm. 
the  similar  manner 
the  effect  of  antisolvent 
the  final  size  of 
cyclotrimethylenetrinitramine  product  can  be  explained.  The  nucleation  time  increases  with  increasing 
temperature  of  antisolvent  because  of  reduction  of  the  supersaturation  level.  Furthermore  the  diffusion 
cyclotrimethylenetrinitramine nucleation seem to be induced after complete mixing between solvent and 
antisolvent  and  crystals  are  growing  in  the  single  bulk  phase  at  a  high  temperature.  The  crystal  size 
increases with the temperature of the antisolvent at the temperature higher than 293.15 K as shown in Fig. 
3.  In  addition  many  angular crystals  observed at  313.15 K  as shown in  Fig.  3 c are  supported  by  the 
evidence  of  crystal  growth 
single  bulk  phase.  However  highly  agglomerated 
cyclotrimethylenetrinitramine particles are formed at the temperature lower than 293.15 K as shown in 
Fig.  3  a.  At  a  low  temperature  time  required  for  nucleation  and  the  diffusion  rate  of  solvent  and 
antisolvent  decreased  and  those  induce  increase  of  the  coalescence  frequency  of  droplets  and  the 
proportion of droplets containing particles. Random-shaped agglomerates are formed by the coalescence 
among droplets containing tiny particles  in the atomized droplet system 6. Slow growth rate indicates 
that portion of supersaturation consumption by the crystal growth decreases whereas that by nucleation 
increases. Therefore it induces the small-sized particles.  
Figure 3. SEM images of cyclotrimethylenetrinitramine obtained with the temperatures of a 273.15 K b 293.15 
and  c  313.15  K.  The  cyclotrimethylenetrinitramine  concentration  3.5g100g  acetone    the  spray  distance  3.7 
As  shown  in  Fig.  4  it  was  found  that  the  crystal  size  of  cyclotrimethylenetrinitramine  is  remarkably 
decreased by addition of PVP the concentration of which is 0.005 wt in antisolvent. The average crystal 
size  of  cyclotrimethylenetrinitramine  obtained  with  the  addition  of  PVP  is  790  nm  but  that  obtained 
without additive is 1120 nm Fig.  4b dashed line. A solute-philic polymer  is  commonly used to 
control growth rate in crystallization process and PVP is reported as growth rate retardation in a 
cyclotrimethylenetrinitramineacetone system 7. 
a                                                                          b 
Figure  4.  a  SEM  image  and  b  crystal  size  distribution  of  cyclotrimethylenetrinitramine  obtained  with  PVP 
Cyclotrimethylenetrinitramine concentration 5.0g100g acetone the crystallizer temperature 293.15 K the spray 
Drowning-out crystallization of cyclotrimethylenetrinitramine from an acetonewater system with spray 
was conducted for the production of submicrometer-sized crystals. It was shown that the addition of PVP 
promotes  nucleation  of  cyclotrimethylenetrinitramine  and  induces  formation  of  submicrometer-sized 
crystals. It was found that the smallest crystals can be obtained at the optimum spray distance because of 
incomplete atomization of sprayed solution and a fluttering of solution droplets caused by short and long 
spray  distance  respectively.  In  general  high  solute  concentration  and  low  temperature  accelerate 
nucleation  and  they  are  preferred  to  product  the  small  crystals  because  it  leads  to  product  the 
submicrometer-sized  crystals  by  nucleation  induced  within  each  droplet  before  mixing  of  solution  with 
antisolvent.  However 
cyclotrimethylenetrinitramine concentration and too low temperature.  FORMATION OF SPHERICAL CYCLOTRIMETHYLENE TRINITRAMINE   
BY COOLING CRYSTALLIZATION 
Hyoun-Soo Kim1 Joo-Seung Chae1 Sang-Keun Han2   
Jun-Woo Kim3 Jae-Eun Lee3 Kee-Kahb Koo3 
1 Agency for Defense Development Daejeon Republic of Korea 
2 Hanwha RD Center Daejeon Republic of Korea 
3 Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering Sogang University Seoul Republic of Korea 
 E-mail address koosogang.ac.kr 
ABSTRACT  The  present work  presents  a  crystallization  technique  for  the  production  of 
spherical agglomerates by adding a nucleation retarder polyvinylpyrrolidone K30 PVP K30 
molecular  weight  40000  in  a  cyclotrimethylene  trinitramine  RDXacetone  system.  PVP 
K30  inhibited  the  nucleation  of  RDX  in  the  initial  stage  of  cooling  crystallization  from 
acetone.  However  extremely  rapid  nucleation  of  RDX  occurred  immediately  after  the 
metastable  zone  limit  was  crossed  even  in  the  presence  of  PVP  K30  because  of  extremely 
high supersaturation. Thus it can be concluded that the addition of PVP K30 resulted in the 
formation  of  RDX  particles  with  sufficient  number  density  for  spherical  agglomeration. 
Moreover it was found that the spherical agglomeration process progressed very rapidly after 
Formation  of  spherical  particles  has  been  extensively  investigated  owing  to  their 
superb flowability compressibility compactability packingability and chemical stability 1
3.  In  particular  the  formulation  of  plastic-bonded  explosives  PBXs  with  spherical  high
energetic  particles  regarded  as  having  a  radial  symmetry  would  inhibit  any  preferred 
orientation  of  the  particles.  Thus  any  undesired  anisotropic  expansion  of  the  PBX  can  be 
avoided  3. Droplet-based  crystallization  from  an  emulsion  is  one  of  well-known  methods 
for  the  production  of  spherical  agglomerates  if  crystallization  can  be  confined  to  within 
solution  droplets  124.  Addition  of  a  bridging  liquid  that  is  immiscible  with  the  solution 
phase  but  wets  the  crystal  is  another  popular  method  for  the  production  of  spherical 
agglomerates  and  is  often  called  the  spherical  agglomeration  SA  technique  56.  The 
bridging  liquid  results  in  the  crystals  adhering  to  one  another  by  interfacial  tension  effects 
and capillary forces.   
Garekani  et  al.  reported  a  spherical  crystallization  method  for  paracetamol  this 
method was based on drowning-out from an ethanolwater system induced by the addition of 
polyvinylpyrrolidone  PVP.  They  only  described  that  PVP  is  an  effective  additive  for  the 
retardation  of  paracetamol  nucleation  without  any  noticeable  change  in  its  crystal  structure. 
In addition PVP has been reported as a strong retarder of both crystal growth and nucleation 
of paracetamol owing to strong interactions with the crystal surface and the low mobility of 
In  the  present  work  a  method  for  the  formation  of  spherical  agglomeration  by  the 
addition  of  PVP  was  developed  in  a  batch  crystallization  of  cyclotrimethylene  trinitramine 
from  acetone.  The  RDXacetonePVP 
paracetamolethanolwaterPVP  system  since  PVP  is  a  retarder  for  both  the  nucleation  and 
crystal  growth  of  RDX  910.  In  particular  cooling  crystallization  is  much  simpler  than 
drowning-out because of the absence of any effect by the mixing of solution and antisolvent. 
2. EXPERIMENTAL SECTION 
2.1. Unseeded Batch Cooling Crystallization 
Batch cooling crystallization was performed in a 30 ml jacketed crystallizer Wheaton 
Scientific Celstir  USA. The temperature of the crystallizer was controlled within 0.1 C 
by  using  a  thermostat  Polyscience  model  9710  USA.  The  solution  was  stirred  by  an 
overhead Teflon-coated magnetic bar at 500 rpm. Saturation solutions of RDXacetone with 
and without additives 0.05 wt were prepared at 30 C and the solutions were maintained 
at 40 C for 30 min to completely dissolve RDX. After stabilization the solution was cooled 
down  to  saturation  temperature  and  was  maintained  again  for  30  min.  Finally  the  solution 
was cooled to -10 C at various cooling rates. During the cooling crystallization process the 
metastable zone width MSZW expressed by the temperature term Tmeta was estimated by 
the difference between the saturation and nucleation onset temperature.   
The  shape  of  RDX  particles  was  observed  by  scanning  electron  microscopy  SEM 
JSM-6010LA JEOL Japan. The crystal structure of RDX was investigated using an X-ray 
diffractometer  Rigaku  MiniFlex  Japan  operated  at  30  kV  and  15  mA  with  graphite
monochromatized Cu K radiation   1.5418  .   
3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
3.1. Crystallization of RDX from Acetone 
As  shown  in  Figure  1  no  spherical  agglomerates  of  RDX  were  obtained  from 
acetone only or acetone with PVP K15. It has been reported that RDX crystallized from pure 
acetone has a prism-like morphology with major faces of four trapezoid broad 210 planes 
and eight isosceles triangular side faces of 111 planes such as the relatively large crystals 
shown  in  Figure  1a  11.  However  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  111  planes  of  RDX 
crystals tended to be more developed than 210 planes when PVP K15 was added as shown 
in  Figure  1b.  This  indicates  that  PVP  molecules  were  selectively  adsorbed  onto  the  111 
planes  of  RDX.  As  a  result  some  bi-hexagonal-pyramid  RDX  crystals  were  obtained  upon 
the addition of PVP K15. 
Figure 1. SEM images of RDX obtained from acetone a cooling rate of 20 Cmin without 
additive  b  cooling  rate  of  70  Cmin  without  any  additive  c  cooling  rate  of  20  Cmin 
with  PVP  K15  and  d  cooling  rate  of  70  Cmin  with  PVP  K15.  Those  images  have  the 
same magnification and size of the scale bar is 200 m. 
3.2. Formation of Spherical Agglomerates of RDX 
It  was  found  that  spherical  agglomerates  of  RDX  were  formed  from  acetone  with 
PVP K30 as shown in Figure 2. According to extremely high supersaturation the nucleation 
rate  of  RDX  with  PVP  K30  was  extremely  high  than  for  other  systems  and  therefore  it 
induced  a  high  collision  frequency  due  to  the  huge  number  density  of  RDX  particles.  In 
addition  high  supersaturation  provided  rapid  crystal  growth  for  sufficient  creation  of  a 
crystalline bridge which is the basis of agglomeration. Thus spherical agglomerates can be 
formed  even  if  a  strong  nucleation  retarder  is  added  as  illustrated  in  Figure  3.  Such 
hypothesis can be confirmed experimentally as depicted in Figure 4 showing RDX particles 
obtained at MSZW after 2 and 3 min. As shown in Figure  4a fine RDX particles with size 
smaller  than  10  m  and  loosely  agglomerated  particles  existed  concomitantly  at  first. 
However the fine particles almost agglomerated within just 1 min as shown in Figure 4b. In 
summary  a  spherical  agglomeration  is  formed  after  intense  nucleation  but  this  process 
becomes very fast if the number density of particles high enough. 
Figure  2.  SEM  images  of  RDX  agglomerates  obtained  from  acetone  with  PVP  K30  a 
cooling rate of 20 Cmin and b cooling rate of 40 Cmin c cooling rate of 70 Cmin. 
All images have the same magnification and size of the scale bar is 200 m. 
Figure  3.  Schematic  diagram  of  the  proposed  mechanism  for  the  formation  of  spherical 
agglomerates with a nucleation retarder. 
Figure 4. SEM images of RDX particles obtained from acetone with PVP K30 at a cooling 
rate of 40 Cmin a at MSZL after 2 min and b at MSZL after 3 min. RDX particles at 
MSZL after 1 min could not be filtrated owing to the very small crystal size and low number 
density of particles. Size of the scale bar is 200 m. 
3.3. Characterization of Spherical Agglomerates of RDX 
Figure  5  shows  the  PXRD  patterns  of  RDX  crystals  obtained  from  acetone  Figure 
1b and spherical agglomerates of RDX obtained from acetone with PVP K30 Figure 2c at a 
cooling  rate  of  70  Ch.  PXRD  patterns  of  all  samples  matched  well  with  those  of  -forms 
reported elsewhere 12. Further it was confirmed that PVP and spherical agglomeration had 
no influence on the RDX crystal structure. 
Figure 5. Powder X-ray diffraction patterns of RDX particles and spherical agglomerates. 
It  was  found  that  spherical  agglomeration  of  RDX  can  be  obtained  by  cooling 
crystallization from acetone with PVP K30 and a mechanism for this process was proposed. 
PVP K30 strongly inhibited nucleation at first but induced extremely rapid nucleation owing 
to high supersaturation. The rapid nucleation was considered to provide high enough number 
density  of  particles  for  the  formation  of  spherical  agglomeration.  The  size  of  spherical 
agglomeration  could  be  increased  easily  by  increasing  the  cooling  rate  since  the  number 
density  of  elementary  particles  of  the  spherical  agglomerations  increased  with  increasing 
This work was supported by Next-Generation Converged Energy Materials Research 
Center  and  by  Hanwha  and  Agency  for  Defense  Development  UC120019GD  Republic  of 
Modelling of the consumption of a dye used to probe the decomposi
tion of nitrocellulose 
Manfred A. Bohn1 Mohammed Moniruzzaman2 and John Bellerby 
1 Fraunhofer-Institut fuer Chemische Technologie 
Postfach 1240 D-76318 Pfinztal-Berghausen Germany 
2 Department of Engineering and Applied Science Cranfield University Defence Academy 
Shrivenham Swindon SN6 8LA United Kingdom. 
Version CD-Proceedings of 45th ICT conference 
A non-destructive UV-Vis spectroscopic method together with a dye was used to study the 
ageing of nitrocellulose NC. The method involves determining the change of absorbance 
of a dye with time mixed with NC in a thin film. During the ageing of the NC two secondary  and  one  primary  CO-NO2  groups  at  the  anhydroglucopyranose  AHP  ring  positions 
C2 C3 and C6 undergo decomposition and this leads to NOx formation. The NOx nitrates 
the dye and the decrease in the concentration of the original un-nitrated dye is followed 
by UV-Vis spectroscopy. The reaction of the dye with NOx was monitored by periodically 
recording the absorption spectra of the films. The graphs of the logarithmic absorbance as 
function of ageing time produced non-linear plots. However splitting the data into three 
time intervals was found to give rise to three linear regions with three distinct rate constants.  A  simplified  data  description  was  therefore  made  at  first  using  segmented  data. 
Thereafter  the  data  were  evaluated  with  extended  modelling  using  i  a  first  order  description  ii  a  second  order  description  and  iii  a  nth  order  description.  This  modelling 
considered the data as a whole no splitting of data in segmented time intervals and no 
single temperature evaluation has been made. In this way directly the Arrhenius parameters were obtained together with the three relative partial degrees of substitution for the 
three  AHP  sites.  The  results  from  these  erxtended  and complete  evaluations  agree  satisfactorily with each other and with quantum chemical calculations of the bond dissociation 
enthalpies of the CO-NO2 bonds at the three ring positions. The Arrhenius expressions derived from the experimental data obtained at 40C 50C 60C and 70C gave three activation energy values which are seen to correspond to the homolytic breakdown of CO-NO2 
groups  at  the  C2  C3  and  C6  AHP  ring  positions  on  NC.  Based  on  all  data  and  literature 
results the order of stability of the CO-NO2 groups was concluded to be C6  C2  C3 with 
regard to bond dissociation energies and activation energies. However the order of stability with respect to the rate of conversion loss of NO2 at the three individual positions 
is C6  C3  C2. Comparing the Arrhenius lines of the three rate constants crossing points 
have been identified which are in the temperature range 75C to 87C. At lower temperatures the activation energy values are betweem 103 and 119 kJmol above between 163 
to 191 kJmol. Such a change in apparent activation energy was also found experimentally 
and now these findings are supported by the presented modelling. 
Key  Words Nitrocellulose activation energies at individual ring positions modelling of 
decomposition UV-Vis spectroscopy order of stability change in activation energy. 
Paper 107 pages 107-1 to 107-20. CD-Proceedings of the 45th International Annual Conference of ICT on 
Energetic Materials  Particles Processing Applications June 24 to 27 2014 Karlsruhe Germany. ISSN 07224087. Fraunhofer-Institut fuer Chemische Technologie ICT D-76318 Pfinztal. Germany. 
In the literature a few investigations exist which deal with the different stability of the 
nitrate  ester  group  at  the  three  anhydroglucopyranose  AHP  ring  sites  of  nitrocellulose 
numbered 2 and 3 for the two secondary C-atom sites and 6 for the primary C atom site 
see viewgraph below. The following could be found one quantum mechanical calculation 
1 and four investigations with C-13 NMR on the relative change  of nitrate ester group 
concentrations i by nitration at 90C 3 ii by denitration and by nitration at 75 to 80C 
4 iii by nitration at 110C 5 and iv by thermal degradation at 110C 5. In the recent 
publication of the authors 2 the activation  energies and pre-exponential factors of the 
thermal degradation have been determined. 
flash paper flash cotton flash string gun cotton
14-O--D-glucosidic bond  or generally 14-O--D-glycosidic bond 
 means equatorial bond  means axial bond.    The monomer base is cellobiose.
What is known on the stability and reactivity of the three AHP ring sites
Bond dissociation enthalpies not energies! of the CO-NO2 bonds determined by QM calculations with 
C2      C3      C6             Found order C6  C2  C3
0.92    0.76    1.00
C-13 NMR determination of the rations of equilibrium constants Ki for nitration at the three ring sites 
90C mixed acid.   Found order for nitration C6  C2  C3
D.T. Clark P.J. Stephenson F. Heatley 1981 4
C-13 NMR determination of equilibrium constants of nitration and denitration in T-range 75C to 80C. The 
final degree of nitration is thermodynamically controlled not kinetically.
Found order for nitration C6  C2  C3
Found order for denitration C3  C2  C6
H.R. Leider A.J. Pane 1987 5
C-13 NMR determination of degradation rates at the three sites at 110C over 15 days. 
Found order for degradation C6  C3  C2
Determination of the ratios of equilibrium constants Ki for nitration at the three ring sites 110C mixed acid.
Found order for nitration C6  C2  C3
Motivations and Objectives  
Nitrocellulose is a special polymer and features properties not yet achieved with other polymers
 it can be used to get hard flexible and tight films for lacquers possible with very high gloss
 it is environmentally without issue means it is a green substance
 it is produced according to the goal of sustainability  renewable raw materials are used
 it is used for medical and biochemical purposes filtration blot processes
NC is an energetic polymer which burns nearly perfectly smokeless used as theater NC flash 
NC has good mechanical properties which make GP grains strong and useable under high 
NC shows slow intrinsic decomposition because of the weakness of the CO-NO2 bond at all three 
positions of the 1-4--anhydroglucopyranose AHP rings
But well manufactured NC is of good intrinsic thermal stability
To protect NC against autocatalytical attack by split-off NOx it must be stabilized
The three ring positions of AHP rings C2 C3 C6 have different bond dissociation enthalpies
Therefore they should react with different rates.
The idea is to get information about the different reaction rates in decomposition of CO-NO2 groups
The reaction with a stabilizer could give this information during the initial range of decomposition.
Clarification of the reactivity order of the three sites at the AHP ring should be achieved.
2.   Used materials and sample preparations 
Data of the used nitrocellulose in this work
Mean molar mass of one 
anhydroglucopyranose unit 
Mean total degree of substitution TDS 
Content of ONO2 groups 
Content of NO2 groups 
Most of the presented material is recently published in 2
Mohammed Moniruzzaman John M. Bellerby Manfred A. Bohn.
Activation energies for the decomposition of nitrate ester groups at the anhydrogluco-pyranose ring 
positions C2 C3 and C6 of nitrocellulose using the nitration of a dye as probe.
Polymer Degradation and Stability 102 2014 49  58
Calculation of some characterizing properties of NC
average degree of substitution of the three nitrable sites per AHP ring 
average nitrogen content   
molar mass of one nitrated AHP  in gmol 
content of nitrate ester groups  
to calculate n with given N  
to calculate N with given n  
to calculate M with given n  
MN  to calculate M with given N 
NEn to calculate nitrate content with given n   
NEN to calculate nitrate content with given N  
n is a value between 0 and 3 
Used dye and manufacturing of the NC films 
Mohammed Moniruzzaman has made experiments with NC and an added dye.
an anthraquinone based dye was used SB 59
14-bis ethylamino -910-anthraquinone
It has an activated aromatic system radical 
substitution is possible.
It acts as a stabilizer.
NC films have been manufactured with 2 mass- dye and 5 mass- dioctyl phthalate using 
butanone as solvent.
The films and prior the NC have been thoroughly dried.
The decrease of the added dye was determined by UV-VIS spectroscopy.
For the initial decrease of the dye concentration a reaction type of first order was assumed at first.
But the course of the concentration decrease was different from a first order decrease.
3.1  Reaction scheme of nitration of the dye UV-Vis spectra and  
absorbance-time courses 
Simplified reaction scheme of the reaction between dye and NOx
Example of UV-VIS spectra obtained from NC films with time
Ageing times and absorbance 
values of dye at 50C
UV-visible absorption spectra of an unaged NC film and NC film aged at
50C as function of time.
Two isosbestic points can be seen one at about 552 nm the other at 380 nm.
This indicates a systematic decrease of dye concentration without disturbances.
The experimental data plotted as lnAS0ASt as function of ageing time
1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 2200
Plots of logarithmic absorbance ratio lnAS0AStT  lncS0cStT
against aging time for NC films containing the dye SB 59 which were aged 
at 40C 50C 60C and 70C.
time h  AS -  evaluation 
Plot of lnAS0ASt  lncS0cSt against aging time samples aged at 70 C
Example of the applied segmental 
time intervals of evaluation at 70C
i   t1  0 - 2 h       first part 
ii  t2  3 - 10.5 h  second part 
iii t3  22 - 105 h  third part 
NC degradation at 70C
t3 y  1.065 E-02  t  4.471 E-01
t2 y  3.391 E-02  t  1.213 E-01
t1 y  8.309 E-02  t  3.329 E-03
The big open circles indicate all data obtained at 70C 
the full symbols indicate the parts used for evaluation.
Segmented data evaluation with three first order reactions 
The first step modelling used a segmental  segmented description of the data. The first 
order description was applied step wise along the curves for the segments with linear or 
nearly linear course of the data in logarithmic presentation. The development of this description is shown in the next viewgraph. 
Kinetic description of concentration change of dye with reaction time using a 
first order decrease of the dye concentration
AS  absorbance of the non-nitrated dye 
S   absorptivity of the non-nitrated dye 
cS  concentration of the non-nitrated dye 
kS  reaction rate constant of first order reaction 
Arrhenius plots of reaction rate constants obtained by segmental modelling
Arrhenius plot of the three reaction rate constants for NC decomposition at ring positions C2 
C3 and C6 obtained from data monitored by the dye SB 59. 
The rate constants have been extracted from the linear parts of the first order plots using 
segmental application of three first order reactions.
Results of data evaluation by segmental application of three 1st order reactions
1st modelling - segmental evaluation with three first order reactions   
     single description of single assumed reactions with lncS0cStT 
     one first order reaction  
     for each temperature alone and applied segmental on the three parts of each curves 
     equal weighting by Ai for each Ci position on AHP rings. 
Quantum mechanical calculation of bond dissociation enthalpies BDEnt 
The above presented segmented modeling has some drawbacks inspite of the relatively 
good result obtained. The drawbacks are summarized in the following viewgraph. From 
this is follows that the modelling of the data must be further developed. The segmented 
modelling cannot describe correctly the data. This is shown in section 3.3. 
Implicit consequences of the data evaluation by segmental application of three 
first order reactions
The segmental or segmented application assumes implicitly a consecutive decomposition 
means one site after the other of the nitrate ester groups at the three ring positions. This 
is expressed in the following reaction scheme. Further on this type of modelling imposes a 
full substitution of all ring positions in the sample which means a nitrogen content of 14.14 
mass- or at least an equal substitution.
Consecutive reaction scheme for decomposing the 
nitrate ester groups at the three ring positions.
But the three sites decompose in parallel and the used NC is not completely nitrated and 
very probably also not equally substituted.at the three AHP ring sites.
It is even more complicated in that each ring position will have an own averaged partial 
degree of substitution PDS. 
3.3  Extended data evaluation with three reactions in parallel 
With regard to the above explained drawbacks of this more or less simplified modelling in 
section 3.2 the description with three reactions in parallel was worked out see section 
3.3.1 which also considers non-equal partial degrees of substitution at the three AHP ring 
3.3.1  Establishing the model 
Parallel reaction scheme and rate equations - 1
NCk concentration of nitrate ester groups at position k
The stabilizer reaction is bimolecular
Normalization by concentration of nitrate ester groups at time t  0 
Parallel reaction scheme and rate equations - 2
It follows with Srt  NCrt
during the initial decomposition period the concentration of P is 
kept small and nearly constant by the action of the dye Pt  Po.
Then it can be fused with kF to the new constant kF
Normalization of dye or stabilizer concentration with its 
initial concentration.
The normalized decrease of the dye is equal to the 
normalized decrease of NC.
Integration of the rate equation results in this relation 
between normalized concentrations of stabilizer and NC.
The modelling is applied with increasing complexity starting in section 3.3.2 with a first 
3.3.2  Modelling with three parallel first order reactions at once and equal 
weighting of the three sites but applied for each temperature alone 
Use of three first order reactions in parallel applied at each temperature alone
Description of the decrease of the dye concentration with three parallel reactions of first order applied 
for each temperature alone all three reactions fitted at once. Equal weighting A2  A3  A6  0.33333.
Results of data evaluation by application of three parallel 1st order reactions
modelling with three first order reactions using all data at each temperature   
     single temperature description but all three segments at each temperature at once  
     three first order reactions in parallel 
     for each temperature alone 
     equal weighting by Ai for each Ci position on AHP rings. 
Quantum mechanical calculation of bond dissociation enthalpies BDEnt 
Direct determination of the three sets of rate constants.
The Arrhenius parameters were determined via separate Arrhenius plots
3.3.3  Modelling with three first order reactions at once and unequal weighting  
of the three sites and applied with the data of all temperature at once 
Use of three parallel first order reactions unequal weighting all data at once
Description of the decrease of the dye concentration with three parallel first order 
reactions. Fitting of all data at once with unequal weighting.
Results of data evaluation by three parallel 1st order reactions all data at once
modelling with three first order reactions using all data at all temperatures at once   
     all temperature all data description  
     three first order reactions in parallel  
     unequal weighting by Ai for each Ci position on AHP rings. 
Quantum mechanical calculation of bond dissociation enthalpies BDEnt 
Direct determination of the three sets of Arrhenius parameters and the three 
3.3.4  The order of reactions in nitrate ester decrease and in stabilizer nitration 
The reaction between stabilizer and NO or NO2 is of second order and can be modelled in 
detail considering this fact 6. But also the decrease of nitrate ester groups can appear as 
a second order reaction which is explained in the following viewgraph. Leider and Pane 
give a first hint in 1981 7 in that they found a correlation between decrease in nitrate 
ester content and the nitrogen gas development which implies a decrease of second order for the nitrate ester content in the NC. 
The order of the reactions decrease in nitrate ester groups and stabilizer nitration
It is plausible that the split-off of NO2 from a nitrate ester group occurs according to a reaction 
However the active species in nitration may result from NO2 radicals combining to give N2O4. 
This would then lead to a reaction of second order with respect to stabilizer nitration reaction.
Note in order to fulfil the radical neutrality two radicals must be always involved in aromatic 
radically nitration also in case of N-NO formation. 
Assuming N2O4 the corresponding rate equation for stabilizer consumption is
The PtPt is seen as one species.
How to imagine the molecular processes
One split-off NO2 snoops around. It still can recombine at the split-off site at the AHP ring..
Accidentally it encounters a second one and forms N2O4 which is radically neutral.
The second NO2 may come from the same AHP ring or a neighbouring one.
By forming N2O4 both NO2 are lost for the NC which has now formally degraded by second 
order. N2O4 is the attacking species in the stabilizer reaction which is formally still 
bimolecular because the two NO2 radicals are spatially coordinated.
Modelling with three second order reactions 
Use of three second order reactions unequal weighting all data at once
Description of the decrease of the dye concentration with three second order reactions. 
Fitting of all data at once with unequal weighting.
Results of data evaluation by three 2nd order reactions all data at once
modelling with three second order reactions using all data at all temperatures at once  
     all temperature all data description  
     three 2nd order reactions  
     unequal weighting by Ai for each Ci position on AHP rings. 
Quantum mechanical calculation of bond dissociation enthalpies BDEnt 
Direct determination of the three sets of Arrhenius parameters and the three 
An nth order reaction could provide with an average between first and second order. Indeed the found common reaction order is with this data n 1.643. As a whole the description is not better than with n  2.00. 
Modelling with three nth order reactions 
Use of three nth order reactions unequal weighting all data at once
Description of the decrease of the dye concentration with three nth order reactions and 
fitting all data at once unequal weighting.
Results of data evaluation by three nth order reactions all data at once
modelling with three nth order reactions using all data at all temperatures at once   
     all temperature all data description  
     three nth order reactions  
     unequal weighting by Ai for each Ci position on AHP rings. 
Quantum mechanical calculation of bond dissociation enthalpies BDEnt 
Direct determination of the three sets of Arrhenius parameters and the three 
weighting factors and of one reaction order n equal for the three nth order 
Summary of best modelling results 
The best modelling is achieved using all data at all temperatures at once. In this way directly the Arrhenius parameters are obtained. The following table lists the best modelling 
results which were obtained with three second order reactions in parallel and with three 
first order reactions in parallel. The weighting factors have been determined also by free 
parameter fitting. A comparison of the obtained activation energies with the bond dissociation enthalpies is given also. The order of stability in the sense of bond strength and 
activation energy is therewith  C6  C2  C3. 
Modelling with three second order reactions in parallel 
Modelling with three first order reactions in parallel 
3.5  Discussion of the order of stability and reactivity of the  
three AHP ring sites 
The order of stability and reactivity was and is still a matter of discussion. In order to shed 
light on this problem the Arrhenius lines obtainable with the determined Arrhenius parameter  from  section  3.4  are  constructed  and  compared.  As  expected  the  difference  in 
activation energy and pre-factor expresses in such a way that cross-points are formed. This 
means  the  apparent  activation  energy  changes  around  these  cross-points  and  a  two 
mechanistic  reaction  behaviour  is  established.  Such  behaviour  was  reported  already  several times in the literature 9 10 and finally has found entrance in test regulations for NCbased materials 11 12. The following two viewgraphs are taken from 10 and the next 
one  illustrates  the  situation  of  apparent  activation  energies  resulting  by  crossing  of  Arrhenius lines. 
Stabilizer consumption  activation energy Ea as function of temperature
Decrease of stabilizer DPA in 
single base GP A5020 20 mm 
Observed change in Ea at 
This is explained as mechanistic 
change in the apparent 
decomposition means what is 
primary recognizable but both 
processes occur in parallel. 
The higher temperature range
is dominated by more
thermolytical homolytical 
bond scission forming radicals
ester group decomposition.
The lower temperature range is 
dominated by more hydrolytical ester group decomposition.
Molar mass decrease of NC  activation energy Ea as function of temperature
Decrease of molar mass of NC in 
single base GP A5020 20mm 
Observed change in Ea at about 
As with stabilizer decrease this is 
explained as mechanistic change in 
the apparent decomposition 
means what is primary 
recognizable but both processes 
The higher tempemperatur range
is dominated by more
thermolytical homolytical bond 
scission forming radicals ester
group decomposition with 
consecutive chain scission.
The lower temperatur range is 
dominated by more hydrolytical
Weighting of reaction rates by investigation temperature in dependence of Ea
Arrhenius plot of the three
main decomposition types of NC
temperature range 10C to 120C
-CO-NO2         -COH  HNO3
ester thermolysis  163 kJmol
ester hydrolysis    100 kJmol
chain hydrolysis      56 kJmol
-CO-NO2          -CO  NO2
Besides  a  mechanistic  change  thermolysis  against  hydrolysis  there  is  a  further  cause  of 
change  in  apparent  activation  energies  namely  the  effect  of  the  decomposition  of  the 
three AHP nitrate ester sites but with the same mechanism here always a homolytic or 
thermolytic bond cleavage producing radicals. 
In the following two viewgraphs the Arrhenius lines of the first order modelling and the 
decrease of the relative normalized concentrations of the three AHP sites are shown. Further  on  this  is  followed  by  the  same  presentations  of  the  second  order  modelling.  With 
both each modellings two crossing points are found in the temperature range 0 to 100C 
see following table. 
Three first order reactions in parallel 
Activation energies below  above kJmol 
Three second order reactions in parallel 
Activation energies below  above kJmol 
Results from Volltrauer-Fontjin 9 
Activation energies below  above kJmol 
Volltrauer  and  Fontjin  have  found  also  a  change  in  activation  energy  in  dependence  of 
investigation temperature which was 22C to 147C. The analytical method was chemiluminescence analysis of the species NO and NO2 9. They were determined quantitatively in 
real time means during decomposition of nitrocellulose. A crossover temperature around 
85C  was  identified.  Below  77C  the  activation  energy  was  106.4  kJmol  and  above  the 
value  was  178.8  kJmol.  These  values  indicate  also  homolytical  decomposition  of  the  nitrate ester groups. Moreover the crossover temperature of 85C is in the range found with 
the  presented  modelling.  In  conclusion  the  activation  energies  in  the  upper  and  in  the 
lower  temperature  range  seem  to  originate  by  the  different  decomposition  rates  of  the 
nitrate ester groups in NC  which  is assumed  to be the homolytical  bond scission of CONO2  in  the  first  step.  The  lower  crossover  temperature  found  with  the  modellings  may 
interfer with the apparent Ea values between these two crossing points. This interference 
may be not noticed after a period of ageing because the nitrate ester groups at C2 are 
already decomposed to a great extent. On the other hand with very fresh material there 
could be found a relative high activation energy between 20C and 90C which will disappear in later times. 
Crossings of the Arrhenius lines of the three 1st order reactions
three first order reactions
plot of lnki values against 1T
in terms of BDEnth and Ea
C2  151.8 kJmol  A2  0.274  lgZ2 1h  22.588
C3  119.3 kJmol  A3  0.263  lgZ3 1h  16.611
C6  191.2 kJmol  A6  0.463  lgZ6 1h  27.036
Relative concentration courses with best fit of three 1st order reactions
rel. concentration -
three first order reactions
decrease of dye and of ONO2  at 70C
C2  151.8 kJmol  A2  0.274   lgZ2 1h  22.588
C3  119.3 kJmol  A3  0.263   lgZ3 1h  16.611
C6  191.2 kJmol  A6  0.463   lgZ6 1h  27.036
in terms of BDEnth and Ea
in terms of degradation rate
Crossings of the Arrhenius lines of the three 2nd order reactions
three second order reactions
plot of lnki values against 1T
in terms of BDEnth and Ea
C2  150.1 kJmol  A2  0.378   lgZ2 1h  22.289
C3  103.1 kJmol  A3  0.177   lgZ3 1h  13.959
C6  163.8 kJmol  A6  0.445   lgZ6 1h  23.051
Relative concentration courses with best fit of three 2nd order reactions
rel. concentration -
three second order reactions
decrease of dye and of ONO2  at 70C
C2  150.1 kJmol  A2  0.378   lgZ2 1h  22.289
C3  103.1 kJmol  A3  0.177   lgZ3 1h  13.959
C6  163.8 kJmol  A6  0.445   lgZ6 1h  23.051
in terms of BDEnth and Ea
in terms of degradation rate
The stabilization of a NC film with an aromatic dye molecule which has activated benzene 
rings  revealed  a  step-wise  reaction  behaviour  via  the  concencentration  decrease  of  the 
dye. The reaction of stabilizer or dye with NO or NO2 is of second order. During the initial 
period  of  decomposition  the  approximation  of  first  order  for  the  stabilizer  decrease  is 
possible assuming a constant concentration of NO2. In order to get the correct activation 
energies  for  the  degradation  of  the  nitrate  esters  at  the  three  anhydroglucopyranose 
AHP ring sites of NC the modelling of the decrease of dye concentration has to consider 
the different partial degrees of substitution at the three sites C2 C3 and C6. For the modelling it is best to use all data at all temperatures at once. This technique provides immediately with the Arrhenius parameters and the normalized partial degrees of substitution. 
One can have the situation of a second order reaction for the formal NC decrease via the 
formation of N2O4. In this case two NO2 radicals form the radically neutral dinitrogen dioxide which spatially coordinates the two NO2 radicals. N2O4 attacks the stabilizer and one 
NO2 exerts the radical substitution at the benzene rings. Therefore the stabilizer reaction 
is still bimolecular. The remaining radical NO2 of N2O4 species combines with the given-off 
radical species from the stabilizer mostly an H radical and facilitates the substitution at 
the stabilizer benzene rings. 
The order of stability of the three AHP ring sites is indeed twofold 
    with regard to activation energy and bond dissociation enthalpy   C6  C2  C3 
    with regard to degradation rates of the three sites                           C6  C3  C2 
In this way the discrepancy between the two opinions in the literature is solved. 
A  further  feature  of  the  degradation  with  three  different  Arrhenius  parameters  is  the 
crossing of the Arrhenius lines. This means one has a change in apparent activation energy 
with investigation temperature because of the different Arrhenius parameters. This supports the practical application using two mechanistic behaviours of NC-based material as 
it is expressed in STANAG 4582 11 and in AOP 48 12. Further on it supports the findings 
of Volltrauer and Fontjin gained by chemiluminescence analysis. They reported a crossover 
temperature around 85C 77C to 97C with acivation energy values of 106.4 and 178.6 
kJmol below and above this crossover tempertature respectively. The modellings give a 
temperature range of 75C to 88 C and 103 to 119 kJmol below and 163 to 191 kJmol 
above this temperature crossover range.  Microwave heated beads as selective adsorbents for large 
Moritz Heil Jrgen Hrttlen Gudrun Bunte Horst Krause 
Thermal desorption of adsorbed species on surfaces is a well known method in 
analytical chemistry and trace detection. These methods were developed for small 
samples dramatically increasing the amount of time if used for large volume 
sampling. In this work we present a concept for particles usable as adsorbents for 
large volume gas sampling. Microwave heating is used for rapid homogeneous 
heating of large particle beds. The dimensioning of particles for the application as 
well as the microwave heating are investigated. 
Detection  of  explosives  is  a  major  concern  in  todays  logistics  due  to  the  large 
amount of cargo transported. While surface traces of explosives are difficult to find in 
large containers the low vapour pressure  of the explosives together with the large 
variety of different background substances makes gas-phase detection a challenging 
task.  MIP  molecular  imprinted  polymers  particles  have  been  shown  to  work  as  a 
selective  adsorbent  for  trace  vapours  of  explosives12.  For  large  volume  sampling 
particle filters provide a good possibility to enhance contact area of the gas with the 
adsorbing  surface  while  still  allowing  high  volume  throughput  and  therefore  low 
measurement times. These particles have to be large enough to minimize pressure 
losses  at  the  filter  point.  On  the  other  hand  thermal  desorption  from  these  large 
particle  beds  must  be  feasible  in  an  appropriate  amount  of  time.  A  concept  for 
particles  that  can  be  heated  homogeneously  in  a  short  amount  of  time  will  be 
                                                 
1 Bunte et al. Gas phase detection of explosives such as 246-trinitrotoluene by molecularly imprinted polymers 
Anal. Chim. Acta 591 2007 49-56 
2 Bunte et al Trace detection of explosives vapours by molecularly imprinted polymers for security measures 
If large volumes are to be sampled through a pipe pressure losses at the adsorbing 
particles have to be estimated to avoid insufficient gas flow through the adsorbent. 
The flow through a simple pipe can be estimated by the Carman-Kozeny equation 
with  as porosity  as dynamic viscosity SV as specific surface  as areic volume 
current and  L as length. SV has been chosen to be calculated for spheres with a 
D43  of  about  800 m  to  allow  the  use  of  industrial  available  spheres  of  different 
materials. However this can only be used if there is low variance of porosity. A better 
description is given by the Ergun equation 
which is valid for incompressible media. In this equation  is the density of the gas 
and  Re  is  the  modified  Reynolds  number.  By  using  the  ideal  gas  law  and  the 
differential Darcy equation a correction term can be established leading the modified 
Ergun equation for gases 
This leads to following results 
With 100 mbar as the upper threshold for the pressure loss package lengths of 5 cm 
in  tubes  with  8 cm  diameter  are  acceptable.  This  configuration  allows  volume 
currents of several cubic meters per minute with pressure losses below 100 mbar. 
Heating of such an amount of large particles leads to problems using conventional 
heating by thermal conductivity. Due to the large volume and slow heating kinetics 
either long equilibration times or large temperature gradients inside the bed have to 
be  accepted.  Therefore  microwave  heating  has  been  chosen  for  homogeneous 
heating  of  the  bed.  Several  microwave  adsorbing  substances  have  been  tested 
regarding their potential to serve as a microwave active heating layer. Metal particles 
such as iron have been found to be the best. Glass plates have been coated with a 
polymer  containing  iron  chrome  and  nickel  particles  Golden  Acrylics  Iridescent 
Stainless Steel Fine  and irradiated with 2.45 GHz microwave radiation. Coating 
has  been  applied  with  a  spincoater  Spin  150  at  400  500  600  and  700  rpm. 
Temperature  has  been  measured  with  a  fibre  optic  system  Polytec  FOTemp-4. 
Typical heating curves are as following 
These curves can be described with a logistic growth of the type 
with  very  good  correlation  coefficients  R0.998.  The  parameters  b  as  preexponential factor and k as heating rate can be evaluated regarding the influence of 
layer thickness and microwave power 
Unsurprisingly  increasing  power  and  layer  thickness  lead  to  stronger  heating. 
However layer thicknesses achieved with 400 rpm and 500 rpm seem to have no real 
influence. This allows rapid heating to a preset temperature using multi stage heating 
applying  different  microwave  power  over  time.  Following  graph  illustrates  the 
capability  of  heating  a  glass  slide  of  15 cm  x  7.5 cm  to  precisely  200 C  without 
overshooting within 30 sec. 
Unfortunately  the  commercial  polymer  could  not  be  used  to  coat  the  selected 
particles.  Due  to  the  size  of  the  metal  particles  inherent  in  the  polymer  it  was 
impossible  to  use  this  specific  polymer  in  the  fluidized-bed  coater.  Carbonyl  iron 
powder  has  been  tested  as  a  substitute  for  this  polymer  and  first  results  are  very 
promising  heating  a  particles  bed  of  5 cm  height  and  4 cm  diameter  of  800 m 
particles to 330 C within 30 sec at 2.7 kW microwave power. Further effort will be 
put into characterizing these particles. 
Metal  particles  can  be  used  to  create  microwave  active  heating  layers  for 
homogeneous heating of particle beds for thermal desorption or other applications in 
need  of  homogeneous  and  fast  heating.  Layer  thickness  is  vital  to  control  heating 
properties of the bed. Carbonyl iron powder is available with defined size distributions 
and insulating properties. The influence of these properties on the heating model and 
the respective coefficients will be investigated next. Finally a MIP layer will be applied 
to add selective adsorbing capability to the particles. Hot-Spot Modelling of Propellant Regression 
Sebastian Knapp Norbert Eisenreich Stefan Kelzenberg Volker Weiser 
Fraunhofer Institut fr Chemische Technologie ICT 
76327 Pfinztal Germany 
sebastian.knappict.fraunhofer.de 
This  work  presents  a  simple  one  dimensional  model  to  study  theoretically  various  effects  in  energetic 
materials. For this purpose the heat and mass transport equation coupled with a reaction kinetic involving 
the strong non-linear Arrhenius-term of the chemical reaction rate constant must be solved. Because of 
the  symmetry  the  3-dimensional  problem  could  be  simplified  to  one  dimension.  Here  the  numerical 
procedure for solving these two coupled differential equations with 1-dimensional Greens functions is 
described.  With  this  model  parameter  studies  could  be  performed  to  investigate  the  influence  of  the 
different parameters. As a simple model the combustion of an energetic material with a 1st order chemical 
reaction  is  presented.  A  first  example  of  a  study  varying  the  reaction  kinetic  and  heat  of  reaction 
influencing the burning rate is shown. 
The theory of ignition combustion and explosion involves parabolic differential equations with respect to 
heat and mass transfer. When including reaction kinetics as inhomogeneous terms the solution requires 
numerical methods to be applied. The use of Greens functions enables to separate the time dependent 
part from the space related part with the latter to be formed as an integral and the time dependence to be 
the only part solved for example by Euler polygon method 1 2. The method was effectively applied on 
cases of strong temperature or species gradients and complicated granular structures 3-5 because then 
Greens function spreads out in space only with small limits reducing substantially the computation time. 
The  currently  used  3-dimensional  version  can  simply  be  used  also  for  1-dimensional  calculations. 
Therefore first results of modeling the combustion of an energetic material and its regression might be 
qualitatively  analyzed.  These  include  the  ignition  and  the  regression  under  normal  conditions  and  the 
influence of varying parameters. 
THEORY THE HOT-SPOT MODEL 
Modeling  of  ignition  and  combustion  of  energetic  materials  is  difficult  to  achieve.  The  main  physical 
processes in the combustion of solid materials are heat and mass transfer. This means heat and species are 
generated and consumed by various processes at the combustion front and distributed in the material and 
the burn-out zone. For modeling the heat flow equation has to be solved simultaneously with the mass 
transfer  equation.  Both  equations  are  coupled  by  the  chemical  reaction  kinetics.  For  symmetrical 
problems this could be simplified to a one dimensional problem. 
The heat equation which describes the propagation of the scalar temperature field in space and time in 
dependency of the physical properties of the material and the source terms is well known 
cid2025cid1870cid1318cid1846cid1855cid3043cid1870cid1318cid1846cid2034cid1846cid1870cid1318cid1872
Here cid2025  is  the  density cid1855cid3043  the  specific  heat  capacity  and cid2019  the  heat  conductivity  which  are  assumed 
In 1D the equation is simplified to  cid2034cid1846cid1876cid1872
cid2034cid1872 cid4652cid4652cid1318cid4672cid2019cid1870cid1318cid1846cid4652cid4652cid1318cid1846cid1870cid1318cid1872cid4673cid1843cid4662cid1870cid1318cid1872 
cid2034cid1872 cid2018cid1846cid1876cid1872cid1843cid4662cid1876cid1872cid2025cid1855
constant in the following procedures. 
The source term on the right hand side describes the heat power density produced by a chemical reaction. 
To solve this problem the Greens function method is used. 
The mass transport equation which describes the propagation of the scalar concentration field in space 
and time in dependency of diffusion coefficients is given by 
cid2034cid1855cid3036cid1870cid1318cid1872
cid2034cid1872 cid4652cid4652cid1318cid4672cid1830cid3036cid1870cid1318cid4652cid4652cid1318cid1855cid3036cid1870cid1318cid1872cid4673cid1855cid4662cid3036cid1870cid1318cid1872 
In 1D it could also be simplified to cid2034cid1855cid3036cid1876cid1872
cid1830cid3036cid1855cid3036cid1876cid1872cid1855cid4662cid1876cid1872 
Here D is the diffusion coefficient and c the mass concentration. 
The source term on the right hand side describes the change of concentration by the chemical reaction. 
The  Hot-Spot  Model  solves  the  heat  transport  and  mass  transport  equation  with  the  Greens  function 
method. Therefore we look for the fundamental solution of these parabolic partial differential equations 
with  the  same  form  which  could  be  found  by  a  Fourier-Transformation  for  example.  For  the  heat 
transport equation in one dimension the fundamental solution is 
In  the  case  of  the  Laplace  operator  the  fundamental  solution  accords  with  the  Greens  function. 
Consequently the solution of the homogeneous heat transport equation is 
with cid1876cid18720  and  the  initial  condition cid1846cid18760cid1873cid1876  is  given  by  the  convolution  of  the 
Greens function with the initial condition 
cid1833cid1876cid1872cid1876cid1872 14cid2024cid2018cid1872cid1857cid2879cid3436cid3051cid3118cid2872cid3089cid3047cid3440
cid2034cid3047cid1846cid1876cid1872cid2018cid1846cid1876cid1872  
cid1846cid1876cid1872 14cid2024cid2018cid1872 cid3505cid1857cid2879cid3436cid3051cid2879cid3052cid3118
cid2872cid3089cid3047 cid3440cid1873cid1877cid1856cid1877
For the inhomogeneous problem 
The reaction kinetics form the source term for the heat transport equation and connects this to the mass 
transport equation.  
cid2034cid3047cid1846cid1876cid1872cid2018cid1846cid1876cid1872cid1858cid1876cid1872 
cid1846cid1876cid1872cid3505cid3505
cid34934cid2024cid2018cid1872cid1871cid1857cid2879cid3436cid3051cid2879cid3052cid3118
with cid1876cid18720 and the initial condition cid1846cid187600 the solution is given by 
cid2872cid3089cid3047cid2879cid3046cid3440cid1858cid1877cid1871cid1856cid1877cid1856cid1871
the same way only replacing thermal diffusivity cid2018 by the diffusion coefficient cid1830cid3036. 
is proportional to the periodic change of the particle concentration and the heat of reaction cid1869cid3036 
The periodic change of the concentration is proportional to the reaction rate constant cid1863cid3036cid3037 
The mass transport equation has the same structure like the heat transport equation and could be solved by 
The heat release of a chemical reaction the heat power density is the source term for the heat transport. It 
The  reaction  rate  constant  is  commonly  described  by  the  Arrhenius-equation  which  depends  on  the 
Here cid1852cid3036cid3037  is  the  pre-exponential  factor cid1844  the  universal  gas  constant  T  the  temperature  and cid1831cid3028  the 
activation  energy.  The  function cid1858cid1855cid3036cid1855cid3037  in  the  equation  above  depends  on  the  reaction  scheme  to  be 
For a 0th order reaction with the reaction scheme A  C the periodic change of species concentration 
depends only on the reaction rate constant and it is independent from the concentration. 
cid1843cid4662cid1876cid1872cid3533cid1869cid3036cid2034cid1855cid3036cid1876cid1872
cid2034cid1855cid3036cid1876cid1872
cid3533cid1863cid3036cid3037cid1858cid1855cid3036cid1855cid3037
cid1863cid3036cid3037cid1846cid1852cid3036cid3037cid1857cid2879 cid3006cid3250cid3019cid3021cid3045cid1318cid3047 
cid2034cid1855cid3002cid1876cid1872
cid1855cid3002cid1876cid1872cid1855cid3002cid2868cid1872cid1863cid1846 
Therefore the species concentration develops according 
with the initial concentration cA0. Thereby the heat power density for the heat transport equation depends 
only on the heat of reaction and the reaction rate constant and therefore on the temperature and the kinetic 
For a 1st order reaction with the reaction scheme A  C the reaction rate depends additionally on the 
Therefore the species concentration develops according 
cid1843cid4662cid3045cid3032cid3028cid3030cid1869cid3045cid3032cid3028cid3030cid2025cid1855cid3043cid1852cid3002cid1857cid2879cid3006cid3276cid3019cid3021 
concentration of the starting substance cid2034cid1855cid3002cid1876cid1872
cid1863cid1846cid1855cid3002cid1876cid1872 
cid1855cid3002cid1876cid1872cid1855cid3002cid2868cid1857cid2879cid3038cid3047 
with the initial concentration cid1855cid3002cid2868. The heat power density becomes 
cid1843cid4662cid3045cid3032cid3028cid3030cid1869cid3045cid3032cid3028cid3030cid2025cid1855cid3043cid1852cid3002cid1857cid2879cid3006cid3276cid3019cid3021cid1855cid3002cid1876cid1872 
cid1843cid4662cid3009cid3020cid1876cid1872 cid1843cid28682cid2024cid2026cid3051cid1857cid2879cid4678cid3051cid2879cid3051cid3116cid3118
cid2870cid3097cid3299cid3118 cid4679cid2012cid1872cid1872cid2868 
cid2872cid3089cid3047cid2879cid3046cid3440cid3435cid1843cid4662cid3009cid3020cid1877cid1871cid1843cid4662cid3045cid3032cid3028cid3030cid1877cid1871cid3439cid1856cid1877cid1856cid1871
cid1846cid1876cid1872cid3505cid3505
cid34934cid2024cid2018cid1872cid1871cid1857cid2879cid3436cid3051cid2879cid3052cid3118
cid2872cid3005cid3284cid3047cid2879cid3046cid3440cid1855cid3002cid1877cid1871cid1856cid1877cid1856cid1871
cid1855cid3036cid1876cid1872cid3505cid3505
cid34934cid2024cid1830cid3036cid1872cid1871cid1857cid2879cid3436cid3051cid2879cid3052cid3118
In summary the solution of the heat transport equation results in 
External heat input and ignition at a defined point in time and space is modeled by a Gaussian shaped 
function. This is called a Hot-Spot. It represents a second source term in the heat transport equation.  
And the mass transport equation for each species i 
The numerical approach to solve the convolution integral mainly consists of three steps. First the initial 
distribution of Hot-Spots is calculated. In a second step the heat release due to the chemical reaction is 
added  to  the  initial  distributions.  These  profiles  are  assumed  to  be  instantaneously  inserted  therefore 
being multiplied each by the Dirac delta function cid2012cid1872. The third step is to calculate the solution of the 
integral via cid1856cid1871 results in the integrand itself because of the Delta function. After convolution the resulting 
heat and mass transport equation by convolution of the related profiles with their Greens functions. The 
temperature profile is used as the initial temperature distribution for a new time step. It closes the iteration 
loop and starts a new one. The calculation schematic is shown in Figure 1. 
Figure 1 Schematic view of the model calculation. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
With this method for heat and mass transport problems with a chemical reaction some preliminary results 
are calculated. The effect of a burning energetic material under different conditions could be studied and 
first  results  of  a  linear  reacting  energetic  material  are  shown  in  Figure  3-Figure  5.  The  results  at  the 
different time steps in the figures are coded by the differently colored lines. 
The  initial  configuration  is  shown  in  Figure  2.  A  reactive  solid  is  placed  in  space  with  a  specific 
concentration  profile.  It  extends  over  the  whole  simulation  space  with  a  small  gap  at  the  beginning  to 
transfer  heat  and  mass  to  this  area  250  and  2000  with  different  physical  parameters.  The  solid  is 
ignited by an initial heat impulse modeled as an initiating hot-spot. 
Ignition heat impulse
the energetic material
Figure 2 Schematic of the modeled system. 
For the physical and kinetic parameters typical values of solid energetic materials are chosen. The used 
source term in the heat transport equation includes 1st order chemical reaction kinetics. 
Figure 3 Temperature sequence for the modeled system. 
Figure 4 Educt concentration profile. 
Figure 5 Product concentration profile. 
From  the  temperature  and  the  concentration  profiles  the  velocity  of  the  combustion  front  could  be 
determined. For the results shown above the ignition process and the linear regression is shown in Figure 
6. The ignition process leads to an increasing of the burning rate due to the external energy input of the 
ignition  impulse.  After  a  few  time  steps  the  burning  rate  decreases  to  the  constant  burning  rate  of  the 
energetic material. 
Figure 6 Velocity of the combustion front. 
In Figure 7the results of a first study are depicted. The influences of the pre-exponential factor of the 1st 
order reaction kinetics and of the heat of reaction were investigated. The results show that the dependency 
of burning rate as a function of the pre-exponential factor is non-linear. Compared to this the effect of the 
heat of reaction is smaller. 
Heat of Reaction kJmol
pre-exponetial factor s-1
Figure 7 Velocity of the combustion front versus pre-exponential factor. 
With  the  presented  method  different  heat  and  mass  transport  problems  with  a  chemical  reaction  in  a 
reactive  solid  could  be  calculated  and  compared.  In  a  first  study  the  progression  rate  of  an  energetic 
material  and  the  influence  of  the  ignition  process  are presented.  Also  the  effect  of  the  pre-exponential 
factor  and  the  heat  of  reaction  to  the  burning  rate  were  demonstrated.  In  further  investigations  the 
different parameters should be varied. For more detailed calculations the model will be expanded to phase 
transitions and a chemical reaction in the gas phase. 
OVERVIEW ON THE EDA JOINT PROJECT ON INSENSITIVE 
MUNITIONS AND AGEING IMA 
Philippe Gautier Caroline Nguyen1Laurent Munier 2 
9 rue Lavoisier 91710 Vert Le Petit France 
E-mail philippe.gautierherakles.com  caroline.nguyenherakles.com  
7-9 rue des Mathurins 92221  Bagneux France 
E-mail laurent1.munierintradef.gouv.fr  
Keywords ageing  propellant - explosive  methodology  vulnerability  munition  IMA -  
Munitions vulnerability assessment has to be performed to demonstrate compliance 
of  delivered  items.  But  how  will  their  insensitivity  characteristics  change  after 
ageing?  Indeed  to  extend  life  duration  there  is  still  a  lack  of  knowledge  or 
understanding  of experimental  results.  Predictive  methodologies  have  to  be  built  to 
take  into  account  materials  ageing  consequences  and  to  confirm  continued 
achievement  of  vulnerability  requirements.  Moreover  thanks  to  the  work  of 
organisation like the MSIAC this issue is now shared by the international community. 
Thus  an  EDA  joint  project  has  been  built  named  Insensitive  Munitions    Ageing 
IMA with seven participating nations the Czech Republic Finland Germany the 
Netherlands Sweden the United Kingdom and France as leading nation. The main 
objectives  of  this  project  started  in  January  2009  and  ended  in  December  2013 
were to have a first approach of a relevant methodology to predict the influence of 
ageing and operating life cycle on systems vulnerability. This paper describes the 
project process with EDA its organisation work packages the objectives and the 
participants  main  conclusions  and  perspectives.  The  results  of  each  nation  are 
developed in dedicated papers. 
1-  Introduction and context 
When dealing with weapon systems a major concern is to enhance their safety and 
reduce their vulnerability to accidental stresses at all time during the manufacturing 
and  throughout  the  whole  life  cycle.  This  important  challenge  has  to  be  taken  into 
account at all stages of ammunition development. 
A specific label has been defined the IM signature or MURAT signature in France - 
MUnitions    Risques  ATtnus  meaning  Low  Risk  Munitions  which  is  assigned 
after  examination  of  both  energetic  materials  and  ordnance  reactions  to  specific 
threats as  described  in  STANAG  4439  and in  Military  Standard  MIL-STD-2105C. 
However this signature is given at the beginning of the life cycle it is well known that 
the ammunition and more especially the energetic materials are subjected to various 
stresses depending on operational conditions during its entire life cycle. This could 
induce  significant  changes  in  the  initial  IM  signature  as  well  as  in  the  ammunition 
performances  or  lead  to  catastrophic  events.  Therefore  it  is  essential  to  increase 
our  knowledge  on  energetic  materials  EM  reactions  to  accidental  stresses  after 
The link between ageing and vulnerability is nowadays one of the biggest issues for 
our IM community this is the original statement that initiated this project. 
The final goal is to be able to predict ammunition IM signature for any ammunition 
throughout its life cycle. But first of all it is necessary 
  To investigate ageing effects on EM vulnerability characteristics by studying 
cid1  mechanical properties 
cid1  chemical properties. 
  To  study  and  develop  surveillance  methods  to  characterize  materials 
properties with ageing 
  And then to offer a first step of an overall methodology able to predict if an IM 
signature  assessed  on  pristine  ammunition  can  be  kept  throughout  its  life 
Thus the first goal of the IMA project Insensitive Munitions and Ageing was to study 
a large scope of energetic materials and ageing assessment experimental setup. 
To achieve this project contributing members need to share experimental results and 
to perform a lot of experiments. Such EDA cooperation is well adapted to do that in 
an efficient and affordable way. 
In November 2006 driven by France DGA and Herakles and with the EDA support 
a four year work programme has been built. This IMA joint programme is managed 
by  a  technical  arrangement  signed  in  July  2007  under  the  aegis  of  the  EDA.  The 
participating  countries  are  the  UK  Germany  the  Netherlands  Czech  Republic 
Finland  Sweden  and  France.  The  technical  part  of  the  project  started  in  January 
3-  Structuring and Management 
The project is structured in four Work Packages 
  WP1  state of the art 
  WP2  predictive methodologies  
  WP3  surveillance methods  
Considered  energetic  materials  and  experimental  setups  are  listed  in  table  1  and 
Table 1  Energetical materials  
Semtex Pl SE M - Semtex Pl SE M1 
tensile dilatometer 
Sol-gel cross-link density 
cid1  cid1  cid1  cid1   
thermal sensitivity test  cid1   cid1  cid1  cid1  cid1  cid1 
shock sensitivity test 
ballistic impact chamber 
cid1   cid1  cid1   
During  each  progress  meeting  every  6  months  the  agenda  is  organized  in  four 
  Technical presentations managed by Herakles 
  Restitution to the management group and synthesis 
  Acceptance  of  work  and  decisions  of  the  management  group  managed  by 
  Writing  of  the  meeting  minutes  with  decisions  and  actions  approved  and 
signed by all attendees. 
All members of the cooperation Technical Group and Management Group attended 
to the four steps to be more efficient and increase the team spirit.   
4-  Conclusions and perspectives 
The different national results are presented in dedicated presentations and papers. 
At  the  end  of  this  project  a  data  base  building  on  a  large  scope  of  energetic 
materials and tests is available. 
As identified in 2008-2009 during the project elaboration a second phase is required. 
Main  nations  of  the  project  are  agreed  to  keep  working  on  this  topic  as  soon  as 
possible. The recommendations for the future work are 
  To  limit  the  scope  to  2  or  3  energetic  materials  and  to  relevant  tests    the 
same for  each  nation more  extensive  data to  be  analysed  with  parameters 
variability and sensitivity studies 
  To  reinvestigate  historical  test  for  instance  friability  data  and  analysis 
  To include additional loads mechanical vibrations and temperature cycling. 
For long term it seems to be interesting to study also the system environment and  
surveillance techniques 
cid1  Armed Forces have to be actively involved  real needs  problems have to 
cid1  More  accurate  data  from  operational  theaters  to  be  collected  and  further BURNING BEHAVIOUR OF BKDN-MIXTURES  
COMPARED WITH BKNO3 
V. Weiser A. Lity S. Kelzenberg A. Koleczko E. Roth U. Schaller E. Walschburger 
Fraunhofer Institut fr Chemische Technologie ICT Germany 
volker.weiserict.fraunhofer.de 
Potassium dinitramide features in a high potential as effective pyrotechnic oxidiser. In this study 
a stoichiometric BKDN composition and one with 30 boron are compared with the equivalent 
BKNO3 compositions concerning thermodynamic performance shock and friction sensitivity gas 
generation and particle temperatures. 
The  ignition  of  modern  gun  propellants  is  still  a  challenging  task  that  requires  for  new  igniter 
compositions  adapted to the single type of the propellant. The igniter  has to provide a certain 
amount  of gas of high temperature and hot small particles in a short time period.  Pyrotechnic 
research always looks for new components which may help to improve the performance of an 
igniter. Recently  Ammonium  dinitramide ADN and  other  promising  green oxidisers  developed 
in  the  second  part  of  the  20th  century  became  cheaper  by  new  medium  scale  production 
technologies  offering  also  a  basic  access  to  synthesise  new  pyrotechnical  compounds.  One  of 
these is potassium dinitramide KDN qualifying as stable and halogen-free oxidiser with a high 
oxidising potential and moderate hygroscopicity and acceptable stability data. 1-3. 
By the elementary composition KDN is similar to potassium nitrate KNO3 which is widely used as 
pyrotechnical  oxidiser  but  KDN  offers  a  better  heat  of  formation  a  larger  gas  production 
potential and more molar oxygen.  
This study aims in a draft comparison of KDN with KNO3 in combination with boron. BKNO3 is a 
material widely used as standard igniter when high amounts of particles should be produced.  
Thermodynamic Predictions 
To compare the theoretical performance data calculations using the ICT-Thermodynamic Code 
4  were  performed  at  a  loading  density  of  0.1  gcm3  as  a  function  of  the  boron  mass 
fraction. Results are shown in Figure 1. Maximum pressure and temperature are predicted for a 
stoichiometric  composition  of  15  boron which  is  the same  mass fraction  for  both  oxidisers. 
When  using  KDN  a  maximum  pressure  close  to  90  MPa  is  predicted  which  would  by  nearly 
twice the value of BKNO3. Also the maximum temperature is with 4900 K nearly 1000 K higher 
as that of BKNO3. Classical igniter mixtures of BKNO3 include a mass ratio of 30  70 to achieve 
a large number of hot boron particles. At this ratio the system BKDN still features in drastically 
increased  pressure  and  higher  temperatures.  The  chemical  thermodynamic  calculations  predict 
for both systems a condensed material fraction of 16 molkg. This indicates that BKDN should 
feature in profitable pressure generation at a higher temperature level but with a similar amount 
pressure b adiabatic temperature and c mole number of gaseous and condensed products. 
ICT-Thermodynamic-Code  of  a 
isochoric  calculations  using 
KDN was synthesized from surplus ADN prills without coating by dissolving in acetonitrile and 
adding  the  equimolar  amount  of  KOH  in  methanol.  Ammonia  was  removed  by  vacuum  and 
KDN was slowly recrystallized twice from anhydrous acetonitrile.  
To compare BKDN with BKNO3 for each oxidiser two compositions one with 15 and one with 
30 of boron were prepared. 15 of boron is the stoichiometric composition with the highest 
predicted temperature. A mass fraction of 30 boron is a classic mixture ratio of BKNO3 igniter 
compositions in order to achieve a good particle ratio of hot particles. 
Species    Samples  unit 
Investigated compositions. 
To  characterize  the  gas  production  rate  of  the  mixtures  an  especially  designed  mini  bomb 
volume 50 ml was applied 5. 350 mg of the mixture were filled into a perforated casing that 
was fixed inside the mini bomb. The closed mini bomb was equipped with a pressure transducer 
Kistler  6221A  and  electrical  ignition  was  performed  by  a  percussion  cap  DM  1520  Dynamit 
Nobel  achieving  a  maximum  pressure  of  50 kPa  which  was  negligible  with  respect  to  the 
significantly higher pressure produced by the igniter mixtures. 
To investigate the combustion as a function of pressure the mixtures were measured inside the 
ICT  optical  bomb.  This  chimney-type  window  bomb  allows  the  observation  of  the  reaction  of 
energetic  materials  at  moderate  pressure  up  to  18 MPa  under  different  atmospheres  and  is 
equipped with four windows that can be adapted to various spectral ranges. In this case it was 
pressurized with nitrogen at constant levels between 1 and 13 MPa. The samples were provided 
as bulk material inside a plastic tube. For ignition a melting wire was used. 
051015202530350102030405060708090100calculated for0.1 gcm3p in MPaB concentration in wt BKDN BKNO305101520253035010002000300040005000calculated for0.1 gcm3Tad in KB concentration in wt BKDN BKNO3051015202530350510152025mole in molkgB concentration in wtBKDN gaseous condensedBKNO3 gaseous condensedcalculated for0.1 gcm3BKDN 1585 
BKDN  and  BKNO3  compositions  reacting  in  plastic  tubes  at  1 MPa  in  the  ICT 
Measuring Techniques 
For  visible  observations  a  digital  colour  high-speed  video  camera  Motion  Pro  X3  with  up  to 
8000 fps was used to characterize the reaction zones. A macro lens offers a reproduction scale 
NIR-spectra were recorded with a Plane Grating Spectrometer PGS-NIR 2.2 Carl ZEISS GmbH in 
the wavelength range from 1 to 2.17 m. As optical entrance a glass fibre was used. Under the 
applied  experimental  conditions  the  field  of  view  was  about  10 mm  in  diameter.  This  only 
allowed  the  determination  of  time  history  of  overall  temperatures.  The  evaluation  of  NIR 
emission  spectra  used  the  ICT-BaM  code  to  model  spectra  of  gaseous  reaction  products  soot 
and  continuum  radiation.  The  procedure  compares  each  experimental  spectrum  with  a 
calculated  one  using  a  least-squares  fit-method  to  determine  parameters  like  temperature  or 
concentration  paths.  It  is  described  in  detail  in  6.  For  the  recent  application  the  continuum 
radiation  from  1.0  to  2.1 m  was  regarded  as  grey-body  emission.  Potassium  lines  were 
omitted. The evaluation simultaneously results in time profiles of intensity and temperature. 
Experimental Results and Discussion 
Sensitivity on Shock and Friction 
Impact sensitivity and friction sensitivity tests were performed according to NATO STANAG 4487 
and NATO STANAG 4489 procedures with the BAM drop hammer and Friction sensitivity tester 
made by the former company Julius Peter Berlin. The value reported is the smallest load under 
which deflagration has been noticed at least one time in six consecutive tests. 
For all compositions the friction tests show very insensitive behaviour. The BKDN compositions 
are more sensitive to shock than BKNO3. But the materials are still manageable. Also one should 
keep in mind that the samples are pure particle mixtures whose sensitivity might be improved 
by granulation using an appropriate additive agent. 
Species    Samples  unit 
Shock and friction sensitivity of the investigated compositions. 
The  mini-bomb  test  qualifies  excellent  to  compare  the  kinetics  of  gas  production  rate  and 
pressure  generation.  The  pressure  traces  of  these  tests  are  presented  in  Figure  3.  Both  BKDN 
compositions  start  0.6 ms  after  ignition.  That  is  0.2  and  0.3 ms  faster  than  BKNO3  with  15 
and 30 of boron respectively. The stoichiometric BKDN composition reaches a peak pressure 
of about 2.8 MPa after about 1 ms. The composition with 30 of boron is somewhat later at 
about  1.5 ms  with  a  maximum  pressure  of  2.5 MPa.  The  maximum  pressure  of  the  BKNO3 
compositions is about 1.6 MPa and was achieved after 2 and 2.5 ms. This indicates that BKDN 
compositions are sufficiently fast to be used as igniter compositions. The ratio of the maximum 
pressures of BKDN and BKNO3 samples are about the same as predicted in Figure 1a indicating 
that under ballistic conditions the reactions run according to the thermodynamic calculations. 
Pressure traces of the sample combustion inside the mini-bomb. 
Spectroscopy and Temperatures 
As expected the spectra of all compositions feature in the same lines mainly K and systems BO 
of gaseous species overlapped by a continuum emission with a maximum in NIR range. Figure 4 
compares  typical  spectra  from  all  compositions.  The  spectral  intensity  of  the  samples  is 
normalized to the intensity at 1 m. Only the strongest potassium line at 768 nm of the BKNO3 
samples shows a self-absorption effect. It is obvious that the BO-system from 0.4 to 0.65 m of 
BKDN is stronger compared to the intensity of this line and also to the continuum emission.  
0123456700051015202530pressure in MPatime in msBKDN 1585 3070BKNO3 1585 3070 
Spectra of the samples burning at 2 MPa related to intensity at 1 m. 
Omitting the potassium lines at 1.17 and 1.25 m the continuum could be described with very 
high  accuracy  using  Plancks  equation  for  grey  body  emission  to  determine  the  emission 
temperature  of  the  continuum.  In  general  this  continuum  emission  is  generated  by  hot 
condensed  surfaces.  Considering  the  optical  set-up  it  can  mainly  be  attributed  to  detached 
particles in the igniter flame plume. Figure 5 presents the so measured temperature history of all 
compositions burning at 7 MPa. All compositions show their temperature maximum shortly after 
ignition.  BKDN  features  in  higher  temperature  maxima  than  BKNO3  samples  but  cool  down 
faster  than  BKNO3.  In  general  the  absolute  values  are  significantly  lower  than  might  be 
expected when comparing with the isochoric calculations in Figure 1b. Also isobaric calculations 
at 7 MPa result in drastically higher values listed in the legend of Figure 5.  
Temperature history of the compositions burning at 7 MPa. 
For  other  pressure  levels  this  was  similar.  The  maximum  temperatures  of  all  samples  vary 
between  1800  and  2550 K  comp.  Figure  6.  Although  in  most  cases  the  maximum 
temperatures  of  the  BKDN  compositions  are  higher  than  those  of  BKNO3  no  clear  trend  is 
obvious.  Interestingly  the  boiling  or  decomposition  point  of  boron  trioxide  B2O3  is  specified 
between  1770 K  7  and  2520 K  8  which  is  exactly  the  range  of  our  measured  continuum 
temperatures.  This  suggests  that  the  particle  temperature  is  dominated  by  the  boiling  boron 
0405060708091011121314151617181920II1m in m BKDN 1585 2MPa BKDN 3070 2MPa BKNO3 1585 2MPa BKNO3 3070 2MPa00000501001502002510001100120013001400150016001700180019002000210022002300temperature in Ktime in spressure 7 MPaBKDN 1585 Tad4105 K 3070 Tad2848 KBKNO3 1585 Tad3552 K 3070 Tad2601 Koxide that covers the burning oxide particles. The selected measuring techniques did not allow 
measuring  the  gas  temperature  that  might  be  significantly  higher  as  also  indicated  by  the 
spectra of gaseous BO in Figure 4. 
Maximum emission temperatures of hot boron particles measured in the plume 
of the compositions. 
In  combination  with  boron  KDN  offers  an  interesting  potential  as  igniter  composition  that 
promises  a  faster  pressure  increase  with  a  similar  particle  to  gas  ratio  as  BKNO3  including 
particles with a high temperature level. This temperature level is only slightly higher than that of 
KNO3  but  significantly  lower  than  predicted  by  thermo-chemical  calculations  in  particular  at 
increased pressure. This may be explained by the boiling or decomposition point of boron oxide 
that covers the burning particles. HTPB BONDED PYRO-ORGANIC SPECTRAL FLARES 
E. Roth Volker Weiser Angelika Raab Andre Lity 
Fraunhofer Institut fr Chemische Technologie ICT Pfinztal 
Recent  missiles  equipped  with  modern  seeker  technology  are  able  to  distinguish  between 
target and decoy flares evaluating spectroscopic emission. So future flares must be adapted 
to the thermal and spectral emissivity of the platform to be protected. 
One way to achieve such spectral flares consists in the application of so-called pyro-organic 
flares.  The  idea  is  to  combine  hydrocarbon  combustion  to  meet  spectral  requirements  and 
pyrotechnic mixtures to increase the radiation intensity.  
In this study HTPB bonded samples with AP as oxidizer and different pyrotechnical mixtures 
were  prepared  and  tested  with  regard  to  potential  use  as  a  spectral  flare.  Two  thermite 
mixtures and a titaniumgraphite mixture compared to pure titanium and a titanium carbide 
mixture were used. The combustion experiments were performed once in free atmosphere at 
normal pressure and even at reduced pressure levels. It can be shown that all investigated 
samples have good combustion properties as well as very good spectral properties even at 
The oxidation of the binder and post combustion with ambient air of the pyrotechnic reaction 
products lead to a second reaction  phase resulting in a favorable -ratio.  Most  promising 
mixtures for further investigations are with thermite as pyrotechnic component. 
IR decoy flares are used for the protection of various military platforms and even for civilian 
airplanes.  Recent  missiles  equipped  with  modern  seeker  technology  are  able  to  distinguish 
between  target  and  decoy  flares  evaluating  spectroscopic  emission.  So  future  decoy  flares 
have to be adapted to the thermal and spectral emissivity of the platform to be protected.  
Conventional MTV decoy flares emit a continuous IR spectrum whereas the exhaust plume 
of a jet gives distinct band signatures of carbon dioxide and water 12. 
Hence new spectral flares need an emissivity which is similar to hydrocarbon flames of jet 
fuels  according  to  their  spectral  characteristic  and  with  highest  possible  radiation  power. 
This means that the flare needs a similar intensity ratio in defined spectral regions -band 
ratio as the jet plume of an engine. Here the -band ratio is defined by the quotient of the 
wavelength-integrated emission power within the spectral regions of the two bands - and band and should range from 2-10 for a spectral flare. 
One approach for the design of new spectral flares is the pyro-organic flare which is based 
on  the  combination  of  hydrocarbon  combustion  to  design  the  desired  spectrum  with 
pyrotechnic mixtures to improve the performance.  
The  combustion  of  hydrocarbons  leads  to  intensive  CO2  band  in  mid  infrared  region  to 
strengthen  the  spectral  -band  and  with  low  continuum  radiation  in  the near  infrared  to get 
favorable  -band  ratios.  The  pyrotechnic  composition  ensures  highest  possible  heat 
release and combustion temperature optimizing the radiation intensity of the decoy 2 3 4. 
In  former  work  thermite  mixtures  were  successfully  used  as  pyrotechnic  components 
providing  high  radiation  intensity  by  enhanced  temperatures  2.  A  further  aspect  of  pyroorganic  flares  is  the  use  of  atmospheric  oxygen  for  a  consecutive  reaction  to  generate 
additional  radiation  power.  Classical  thermites  produce  pure  metals  that  may  react 
exothermically with oxygen to form the metal oxide but due to the noblesse of this metals the 
energy release is limited and the formation of hot oxide particles is unfavorable to emission in 
-band. So the idea was to replace the thermite by a metal  carbon combination that should 
react in a first step at the surface of the solid pyrolant to its metal carbide  which is able to 
burn  also  exothermically  with  ambient  air  to  form  the  metal  oxide  and  the  aspired  CO2.  A 
detailed  study  of  various  metal    carbon  reactions  showed  that  titanium    graphite  is  the 
most  suitable  pyrotechnic  combination  3.  Also  the  previously  studied  pyro-organic  flare 
mixtures  based  on  a  benzoic  acid  BA    ammonium  perchlorate  AP  mixture  showed 
convincing  properties  regarding  their  combustion  behavior  as  well  as  their  radiation 
characteristics  2.  In  addition  to  the  combustion  and  radiation  characteristics  also  the 
mechanical  stability  and  the  formability  of  a  flare  are  important  and  must  be  taken  into 
consideration. Thus for the first time a polymeric binder was used as organic part in order to 
achieve better mechanical properties. 
Similar  to  earlier  studies  2  3  pyro-organic  flares  were  formulated  on  the  base  of 
metalcarbon and thermite mixtures as shown in Table 1. As pyrotechnic part TiC was used 
and  compared  with  Ti  and  TiC.  As  thermite  mixtures  AlCuO  and  MgCuO  were  selected. 
These ingredients were combined with HTPB as organic component and AP as oxidizer for 
As reference a commercial MTV was investigated considering this is not a spectral flare and 
therefore the comparability is limited. 
SAMPLE PREPARATION  
The powders of the energetic components were pre-mixed in a mortar mill when necessary 
and then granulated. The further processing with HTPB and AP was performed in a planetary 
centrifugal vacuum mixer Thinky-Mixer 5. Then the mixtures were poured into a mold and 
after curing they were cut into strands of 4 x 4 x 40 mm3. 
Titanium powder 25 m 
Titanium  Graphite granulated 
AluminiumCopperII-oxide 
MagnesiumCopperII-oxide 
HTPB  Isocyanate  Catalyst 
Table 1  Compositions of the investigated flare-mixtures 
MEASUREMENT TECHNIQUES 
High-speed digital camera  
Movies  were  recorded  with  a  color  high-speed  HS  digital  camera  Motion  Pro  X3  from 
Redlake equipped with an active-pixel-CMOS sensor and a resolution of 1280 x 1024 pixels. 
Depending  on  the  reaction  speed  a  frame  rate  up  to  8000  fps  can  be  used.  In  the  present 
study  movies  were  recorded  with  a  rate  of  50-200  fps  and  evaluated  with  the  program 
AVICOR 6 to get the burning rates. 
For non-intrusive determination of flame temperatures during the combustion process a fast 
scanning  MMS-spectrometer  ZEISS  MCS 611  PGS-NIR  2.2  with  a  wavelength  ranging 
from  950 nm  to  2.15 m  was  applied  to  record  emission  spectra  with  scan  rates  up  to  60 
spectra  per  second.  As  optical  entrance  a  600 m  glass  fibre  equipped  with  an  SMAconnector is used. The spectra were calibrated for intensity per wavelength using a technical 
black  body  radiator.  Temperatures  were  achieved  from  the  recorded  spectra  by  using  ICTBaM-code fitting theoretical spectra calculated from Plancks law by variation of temperature 
and of a wavelength-independent factor adjusting intensity using a chi-square function 7. 
A fast scanning CVF-spectrograph built at ICT consisting of a rotating circular variable filter 
CVF  wheel  equipped  with  three  interference  filter  segments  was  used  to  obtain  MIR 
emission  spectra.  CVF  continuously  vary  the  transparency  in  the  wavelength  regions  from 
1500 to 2500 nm InSb-detector and 2450 to 14000 nm InSbHgCdTe-sandwich-detector. 
The system operates at a frequency of 100 cycles per second with a complete spectrum at 
each  cycle.  The  optic  structure  consists  in  a  1  to  1  projection  using  ZnSe-lenses.  For  the 
calibration of the spectrometer system a black body radiator was used. 
COMBUSTION EXPERIMENTS 
The combustion experiments were performed in free atmosphere at normal pressure and in 
an optical bomb at reduced pressures of 300 400 and 500  hPa. 
The  strands  were  fixed  on  a  ceramic  plate  and  ignited  at  the  top  with  a  blow  torch  17001800 K. The  combustion  was  observed  with  the  HS-video  camera to receive  characteristic 
flame  pictures  and  regression  rates.  Since  the  seekers  head  acts  by  the  IR-spectrum  the 
radiation in this spectral range is essential for a flare. So a fast filter wheel spectrometer was 
used  to  get  IR-spectra. To  determine  the  radiation  temperatures  an  NIR  spectrometer  and 
the BaM software were used 7.  
The  investigations  under  reduced  pressure  were  carried  out  in  the  optical  bomb  specially 
modified for  this measurement.  For  ignition  a melting  wire  enforced  by  an  ignitable  booster 
paste 8 is used. At least the same measurement technique as it is used for the tests in free 
atmosphere is applied but without the filter wheel-spectrometer. 
Results and discussion 
All samples could easily be ignited and burned down completely with a brightly shining and 
voluminous  flame  see  Figure  1.  Thereby  the  titanium-containing  samples  particularly  the 
one  containing  titanium  and  graphite  Figure  1d  show  a  higher  tendency  for  particle 
formation. The thermite-containing samples Figure 1ef show a bluish  shimmer within the 
flame which is caused by the thermally excited copper oxide CuO. 
Typical screenshots of the burning flare-mixtures b TiAPHTPB c TiCAPHTPB  
d TiCAPHTPB e AlCuOAPHTPB f MgCuOAPHTPB in comparison to a MTV 
All  examined  samples  show  stable  and  highly  reproducible  flame  propagation  speeds 
between  3  and  10  mms  which  are  in  the  same  order  of  magnitude  as  the  measured 
reference  MTV  with  3  to  5  mms.  Only  the  pure  titanium  sample  burns  much  faster  with 
about 10 to 19 mms see Figure 2. 
Flame propagation speed of the pyro-organic flares with different energetic components 
in comparison to MTV 
The mean burning temperatures were determined by taking the average over all calculated 
temperatures  of  a  spectra  series.  Due  to  the  measurement  setup  where  the  spectrometer 
112345678910102030 sample HTPB  AP  ....rp mmsTiMTVTiCTiCAlCuOMgCuOfocus was always on a fixed point the mean temperature is an average of the temperatures 
of  various  reaction  zones.  More  interesting  are  the  maximum  temperatures  indicating  the 
reaction phase with the highest temperature. 
The mean radiation temperatures of all the investigated samples are significantly higher than 
those  of  MTV  which  is  only  1800-1900 K.  The highest mean  temperatures  are  reached  by 
the two thermite mixtures with 2300 K for AlCuO and 2400 K for MgCuO. 
The maximum combustion temperatures of MTV are between 2250 and 2400 K which is in 
the  expected  range  for  MTV.  Also  the  maximum  temperatures  for  the  burning  of  pure 
titanium and titanium carbide are in the same order of magnitude about 2300 K. With about 
2500 K the maximum temperatures of the titaniumgraphite mixture are significantly higher. 
This indicates that besides of the exothermic formation of TiC  fH TiC  -184 kJmol its 
consecutive  reaction  with  atmospheric  oxygen  fHTiO2-945 kJmol  and  fHCO2  394 kJmol is involved in the whole reaction process 9. 
With  values  around  or  just  above  2500 K  the  two  thermite  mixtures  show  the  highest 
maximum temperatures due to their high reaction enthalpies rHAlCuO -402 kJmol and 
rHMgCuO -445 kJmol 9. 
Mean and maximum radiation temperatures of the pyro-organic flares with different 
energetic components in comparison to MTV 
Figure  4  and  Figure  5  show  typical  IR  emission  spectra  of  the  different  flare-mixtures. 
Compared  to  MTV  they  show  two  significant  differences.  While  MTV  is  only  emitting 
continuum  radiation  all  other mixtures  show  distinct  bands  of  CO2CO  water  and  little  HCl. 
Additionally and in contrast to MTV all investigated flare mixtures show two reaction stages. 
The first phase shows a more intensive continuum radiation while in the second phase the 
CO2CO-band  rises  significantly.  So  actually  it  seems  that  first  the  energetic  component  is 
reacting and afterwards mainly the binder with the oxidizer. As it will be shown the products 
formed  during  the  first  step  also  react  with  the  atmospheric  oxygen  -  in  case  of  carbon 
containing  mixtures  to  CO2CO  or  to  metal  oxide  when  they  include  metals.  At  least  an 
increased CO2 formation is reached resulting in an increase of -band and an increase of  
18002000220024002600MTV Tmean TmaxT in K...  APHTPBTiTiCTiCAlCuOMgCuOratio.  Figure  6  shows  the    ratio  of  the  investigated  flare-mixtures.  They  all  show  two 
reaction phases where the  value for the first phase is with 0.5 to 1 in the same range as 
for  MTV.  In  the  second  reaction  phase  values  significantly  above  1  are  reached  which 
comes  close  to  the  characteristics  of  a  real  exhaust  plume.  The  thermite  mixtures  tend  to 
provide higher  ratio values they even reach values up to 10. 
Typical IR-spectra of the first and second reaction phase of Ti- TiC- and Ti  C- mixtures 
in comparison to MTV 
Typical IR-spectra of the first and second reaction phase of thermite mixtures AlCuO 
and MgCuO in comparison to MTV 
23456780005101520I a.u. m MTV Ti 1st reaction phase Ti 2nd reaction phase TiC1st reaction phase TiC2nd reaction phase TiC1st reaction phase TiC2nd reaction phaseH2OCO2HClH2OCO2evtl. CO-OH-NH-CO23456780005101520I a.u. m MTV AlCuO1st reaction phase AlCuO2nd reaction phase MgCuO1st reaction phase MgCuO2nd reaction phaseH2OCO2HClH2OCO2evtl. CO-OH-NH-CO 
Mean  ratio of the different flare-mixtures in comparison to MTV 
Under reduced pressure all samples could be ignited at 500 400 and 300 hPa and burned 
down  completely  only  the  reference  sample  MTV  could  not  be  ignited  below  400 hPa.  In 
Figure 7 typical screenshots of the combustion are shown. The flames are not as distinctive 
and  voluminous  as  under  atmospheric  pressure  comp.  Figure  1  but  the  burning  surface 
can clearly be seen in all cases. In general the combustion process is much slower than at 
atmospheric  pressure  and  with  decreasing  pressure  the  whole  process  tends  to  become 
unstable  but  reproducible  regression  speeds  could  be  determined  see  Figure  8.  The 
sample  containing  titanium  and  carbon  which  burned  very  well  and  quickly  under 
atmospheric  pressure  shows  a  remarkably  low  regression  speed  under  reduced  pressure. 
All other samples show  an analogous behavior  except  for  MTV which seems to get faster. 
Due to the fact that the flame quickly spreads over the entire surface of the MTV-sample and 
that  no  defined  burning  zone  parallel  to  the  cross-sectional  area  is  formed  the  determined 
regression speeds are too high. 
All  investigated  samples  show  a  decrease  in  the  maximum  radiation  temperature  under 
reduced  pressure  except  for  MTV  showing  nearly  the  same  maximum  temperatures.  This 
might  be  an  indication  that  post  combustion  of  reaction  products  with  atmospheric  oxygen 
plays an important role in reaction behavior of the pyro-organic flare mixtures.  
012345678910 1st reaction phase 2nd reaction phasemean ratioX  APHTPBMTVTiTi  CTiCAl  CuOMg  CuOMTV 
Typical screenshots of the burning flare-mixtures under reduced pressure TiAPHTPB 
TiCAPHTPB TiCAPHTPB AlCuOAPHTPB MgCuOAPHTPB in comparison to 
Flame propagation speed of the pyro-organic flares with different energetic components 
under reduced pressure in comparison to MTV 
Mean and maximum radiation temperature under reduced pressure of the pyro-organic 
flares with different energetic components in comparison to MTV 
300400500600060824682040 MTV Ti TiC TiC AlCuO MgCuOrp mmsp hPa300400500120014001600180020002200Tmittel MTV TiC Ti TiC AlCuO MgCuOTmax MTV TiC Ti TiC AlCuO MgCuOT Kp hPaConclusion 
Several  HTPB-bonded  pyro-organic  flares  were  tested  successfully.  All  investigated 
laboratory scaled samples show good combustion and radiation properties - even at reduced 
pressure  -  as  well  as  very  good  spectral  properties  Table  2.  Very  promising  are  the 
samples  containing  thermite  mixtures  which  feature  in  highest  temperatures  and  highest 
spectral band ratios. TiC mixture is also a very interesting energetic component which shall 
introduce additional CO2 by post combustion in atmospheric air. At atmospheric conditions it 
shows high radiation temperatures and a good  ratio. While titanium carbide has a similar 
favorable  ratio but less radiation power it validates the energetic advantage of the TiC 
reaction.  The  mixture  with  pure  titanium  shows  higher  temperatures  but  tends  to  have  a 
worse    ratio.  At  reduced  pressure  the  TiC  mixture  shows  the  best  properties. 
All  mixtures  react  reliably  even  at  low  pressure  but  with  a  sufficient  oxygen  supply  afterreactions are possible providing additional energy andor CO2 for a favorable  ratio. 
Atmospheric pressure 
Regression rate mms 
Max. radiation temp K 
Regression rate mms 
Max. radiation temp K 
Summary of properties of investigated samples 
Atomistic simulation of the temperature dependence of density and 
van-der-Waals interactions of binders plasticizers and mixtures of 
Manfred A. Bohn1 Camilla Evangelisti12 
and Thomas M. Klaptke2 
1 Fraunhofer Institut fuer Chemische Technologie ICT Pfinztal Germany 
2 Ludwig-Maximilian University of Munich Munich Germany 
The intermolecular energetic interactions between binders plasticizers and fillers in elastomer bonded composite rocket propellants CRP and elastomer bonded high explosives 
charges  HEC  some  of  the  PBX  family  control  the  glass-to-rubber  transition  in  these 
elastomer  systems.  Therefore  they  are  of  great  interest  to  explain  the  glass-to-rubber 
transition  and  to  help  to  elucidate  the  different  binder  fractions  and  their  specialized 
hindrances in molecular mobility. In a first step the van-der-Waals and electrostatic interactions between binders and plasticizers will be considered. Using the program package 
Materials  StudioTM  MS  version  6  of  company  Accelrys  an  atomistic  simulation  of  such 
interactions  is  possible.  The  substances  used  are  hydroxyl  terminated  polybutadiene 
HTPB dioctyl adipate DOA and polypropylene oxide PPO which serves as a first step 
towards GAP glycidyl azide polymer. Uncured binders are considered first. For energetic 
equilibration of the molecules and of the configuration to each other and then for the 
calculation of all the energy terms molecular dynamics simulations were performed with 
the  program  part  Forcite  of  MS  in  NPT  ensembles  in  periodic  unit  cell  a  cube  with  isotropic liquid systems. The pressure was set to 1 bar by controlling with a Berendsen barostat and the temperature was maintained to the wished values in the range of 120C to 
-150C with an Andersen thermostat. From the obtained NPT structures of the molecular 
systems  the  cohesive  energy  densities  were  calculated  from  which  the  intermolecular 
energetic  parts  can  be  extracted.  The  temperature  dependent  calculations  are  used  to 
point the glass-to-liquid transition in the systems. 
intermolecular energetic interactions binder HTPB plasticizers atomistic simulation cohesive energy density glass-to-liquid transition 
Atomistic  simulations  help  to  clarify  questions  in  advance  to  and  as  support  of  experiments and also by itself. It was used already some years ago 1. Meanwhile the program tools and the computing ability have improved and the complexity of the investigated systems can be raised. In a preceding work 2 the authors have already made the 
basic  calculations  on  which  the  present  work  continues.  The  glass-to-rubber  transition 
and vice versa the rubber-to-glass transitions is with filled elastomers a complex feature 
345. The elastomer binder forms a polymer shell around the particles whose size and 
structure  is  determined  by  the  interactions  between  binder  and  filler.  From  what  is 
Paper 114 pages 114-1 to 114-18 in Proc. of the 45th International Annual Conference of ICT on Energetic 
Materials    Particles  Processing  Applications  June  24  to  27  2014  Karlsruhe  Germany.  ISSN  0722-4087. 
Fraunhofer-Institut fuer Chemische Technologie ICT D-76318 Pfinztal. Germany.  
known  at  present  this  polymer  shell  seems  more  susceptible  to  ageing  than  the  undisturbed binder matrix 35. Therefore the binder is to divide in fractions of different molecular mobility and these in turn are differently sensitive to external impacts as deformation rate and ageing 4. To understand more this complex behaviour the objective is to 
elucidate  step  by  step  the  molecular  dynamic  behaviour  of  the  elastomeric  binders  by 
itself in mixture  with  plasticizers  and in contact with particle surfaces. In the following 
the temperature dependence of the molecular system is considered. It should be possible 
to  identify  changes  in  the  energetic  interactions  as  function  of  temperature  and  these 
should be in correlation with the glass-to-liquid transitions in the non cured systems. The 
other way is to calculate from densities and molecular volumes the change in free volume 
to identify such transitions 6.  
In  this  paper  atomistic  simulations  of  the  intermolecular  interactions  are  presented 
between some of the binders in actual use with energetic materials see Figure 1 and 2 
which show HTPB hydroxyl terminated polybutadiene and PPO polypropylene oxide or 
polypropylene  glycol  PPG  taken  as  pre-simulate  for  GAP  glycidyl  azide  polymer.  The 
chosen  plasticizer  was  DOA  dioctyl  adipate  see  Figure  3.  The  Table  1  lists  basic  data 
used for the atomistic simulations. 
Figure 1 Schematic chemical structure of hydroxyl terminated polybutadiene HTPB 
Figure 2 Polypropylene oxide PPO or polypropylene glycol a polyether diol. 
Figure 3 Chemical structure of plasticizer dioctyl adipate DOA 
Table 1 Molecules used in the simulations with data on molar masses number of molecules in the periodic simulation cell and the cell sizes. 
Atom number per molecule 
Edge length of initial cubic periodic simulation box 
Molecule number in box 
Total number of atoms 
All the calculations were done using Material StudioTM MS program suite Version 
6 of Accelrys Inc. San Diego CA USA 7. For the molecular dynamics MD simulations 
the potential energy force field FF COMPASSTM 8 from Accelrys was used. The calculations were carried out using the software module Forcite in MS program suite. The NPT 
statistical ensemble has been applied to get the statistical random equilibrium states of 
the molecules with respect to their conformation and their orientation to each other in 
some  defined  periodic  cells  of  cubic  shape.  These  cells  were  constructed  by  the  Amorphous Cell module of the MS program suite. With NPT simulations the number of molecules N the pressure P and the temperature T are under control of the experimentalist 
as in the real world experiments means one can freely choose them. Because of the motional dynamics in simulation and real world the parameters P and T would change vary 
rapidly. Therefore control on these variables is necessary as in real world. In the simulations mathematical algorithms are used. The pressure was controlled using a method developed by Berendsen 9 whereas the temperature control method was that of Andersen 
10. To be sure to have reached the complete randomization and equilibration computational times up to 250 ps corresponds to real time evolution were used for the development  of  positions  and  velocities  on  the  molecular  level.  The  calculation  step  of  the 
Newtonian equations was one femto second. The pressure was set always to 0.1 MPa 1 
Besides the basic control the choice of the force field FF is of major importance to 
get reliable results for the considered systems. The quite modern FF of second generation 
COMPASSTM  is  an  optimized  FF  for  condensed  materials.  It  is  very  good  applicable  for 
CHNO systems but also S Cl and others are included as well as inorganic atoms in different environment. H-bond bridge interactions are not explicitly included they are considered by electrostatic interaction  with different types of  H atoms. The calculation of the 
contributions of the different inter- and intra-molecular contribution requires in periodic 
systems a summation. Here always the so-named Ewald summation method was used for 
both  electrostatic  and  van-der-Waals  interaction.  In  the  calculation  with  temperature 
variations  the  temperature  step  was  always  10C  up  or  down  from  the  last  calculation. 
This ensures faster equilibration at the next temperature step 6. From the NPT structures 
values averaged over the last 30 to 50 ps of T  and energies were extracted. 
The extractable different energy parts are  
cohesive energy density 
inter-molecular potential energy  
inter-molecular van-der-Waals energy 
inter-molecular electrostatic energy 
intra-molecular potential energy valence bond  and cross terms 
intra-molecular van-der-Waals energy 
intra-molecular electrostatic energy 
total potential energy sum of inter and intra potential energy 
total energy sum of total potential and total kinetic energy 
total non-bond energy sum of non-bond vdW and non-bond electrostatic 
Further valuable statistical parameters are 
Mass density course and average 
Pressure course and average 
Temperature course and average 
All energies are given in kcalmol whereby the mol refers to one mol of simulation cells 
with their complete content and not to one molecule per cell. Besides these quantities a 
lot of structural variables are extractable as auto correlation functions and radial distribution  functions  which  give  information  on  conformational  orientations  in  the  systems. 
These quantities will be used later on. Here the work concentrated on the temperature 
dependence on the energetic components. Because of the possibility to analyse the intermolecular and the intra-molecular parts one can evaluate different aspects of the glassto-liquid  transition  the  change  in  the  intermolecular  part  gives  the  change  in  mobility 
related to intermolecular mobility hindrances and the change in intra-molecular energies 
informs about the group mobility in the chain. With cured binders these aspects are all 
included  in  the  measurable  transitions  especially  when  determined  with  DMA  which  is 
probably the most sensitive probing method for this purpose 345. 
3.1  Molecular dynamics simulations with the pure substances HTPB and PPO 
3.1.1  Calculations with HTPB 
Results of the calculations and discussions 
The NPT calculations with HTPB were performed with 3 HTPB molecules in the periodic cubic cell of 2.2 nm edge length at temperatures varying in 10C steps up or down. 
The time period of evolution was 250 ps. The used HTPB simulate differs slightly in the 
ratios for trans cis and vinyl double bonds given in Fig. 1. The variety of the possible random distributions is also not included. Figure 4 shows the results of density calculations as 
function of temperature. The density increases with decreasing temperature as to be expected and it varies in a curved form from about 0.87 at 100C to 0.96 gcm3 at -100C. A 
star  dot  indicates  the  experimental  density  of  0.901  gml  at  23C  11.  In  Fig.  5  the  attempt to separate the data in two regimes can be seen. The density as function of temperature for the not cured HTPB simulate shows a weak transition. At low temperatures 
the  slope  of  the  density  line  is  lower  than  above  a  transition  region  of  around  -70  to  50C.  This  corresponds  with  the  experimental  observations  that  HTPB  and  the  binder 
HTPB-IPDI show a complicated glass-to-rubber transition 345.  
In Fig. 6 Fig. 7 Fig. 8 and Fig. 9 several energy types as function of temperature can be 
seen  the  total  vdW  energy  the  inter-molecular  vdW  energy  the  intra-molecular  vdW 
energy and the intra-molecular electrostatic energy respectively. 
density as function of temperature 
experimental density
y  -5E-07x2 - 0.0005x  0.9143
Figure  4  Density  as  function  of  temperature  of  the  not  cured  HTPB  simulate.  Uncured 
HTPB has at 23C a density of 0.901 gml 11. The data are fitted with a polynomial of 
indication of transition range in density
experimental density
Figure  5  Density  as  function  of  temperature  for  the  not  cured  HTPB  simulate.  A  weak 
transition is recognizable. At low temperatures the slope of the density line is lower than 
above a transition region of around -70C to -50C. This corresponds with the experimental observations that HTPB and the binder HTPB-IPDI shows a complicated glass-to-rubber 
In  analysing  the  content  of  these  four  figures  on  the  behaviour  of  the  energetic 
components  with  temperature  some  differences  in  the  pin-pointed  transition  temperatures can be seen. Total vdW and inter-molecular vdW changes their behaviour at about 
-60C whereas the two intra-molecular energies vdW and electrostatic have the change
 
over at about 20 to 30C lower. This can be interpreted as different freezing temperatures for the molecular motions. The intramolecular motions are longer active than the 
greater chain segment parts probed by the intermolecular interactions. 
Figure  6  Total  intra    inter  van-der-Waals  energy  as  function  of  temperature  for  not 
inter-molecular vdW 
Figure  7  Intermolecular  van-der-Waals  energy  versus  temperature  for  not  cured  HTPB. 
The observed transition range is at higher temperatures than for the total vdW energy. 
intra-molecular vdW 
Figure  8  Intra-molecular  van-der-Waals  energy  versus  temperature  for  not  cured  HTPB. 
The observed transition range is at lower temperatures than for the total vdW energy. 
intra-electrostatic 
Figure 9 Intra-molecular electrostatic energy versus temperature for not cured HTPB. The 
observed transition range is at lower temperatures than for the total vdW energy. 
3.1.2  Calculations with PPO 
The hydroxyl terminated binder polypropylene oxide PPO or polypropylene glycol PPG seen as GAP pre-simulate is analyzed in the similar way as HTPB. The glass transition temperature for PPO is reported to be at about -75C determined with dipole relaxation  spectroscopy  12.  In  13  a  similar  value  is  cited  but  not  measured.  Because  of 
the method used in 12 probably the small segment rotational motions as the side CH3 
group has been seen. There is other information which gives higher glass temperatures in 
the range of -60C 14. 
The Fig. 10 Fig. 11 Fig. 12 Fig. 13 and Fig. 14 show five energy types as function 
of  temperature  the  total  vdW  energy  the  inter-molecular  vdW  energy  the  intramolecular  vdW  energy  the  intra-molecular  electrostatic  energy  and  the  inter-molecular 
electrostatic energy respectively. The total vdW energy shows a transition range between 
-60C  to  -45C  as  it  is  the  case  with  inter-molecular  and  intra-molecular  vdW  energies. 
The intra-molecular vdW energies are already negative in contrast to HTPB which means 
a  different  situation  in  PPO  is  encountered.  Interesting  is  the  course  of  the  intramolecular electrostatic energy Fig. 13. The course is in a wider sense similar to the one of 
HTPB but the values are much greater and even positive a result of the C-O dipoles in 
PPO. This means in PPO are the distances between the dipoles already in such magnitude 
that already repulsive forces are acting. A qualitative explanation is the more or less fixed 
orientations of the two dipoles C-O-C in the main chain. The energy increases first with 
decreasing temperature because with increasing hindrance of the rotational motions the 
two dipoles get in average more and more oriented and this increases the energy in such 
a configuration 15. At the transition the tendency to decrease the electrostatic energy is 
observable. Meanwhile the molecular motions have reduced considerably and the material  must  be  in  the  energy-elastic  state.  The  decrease  is  explainable  by  orienting  of  the 
dipoles  to  increase  the  intermolecular  interaction  more  then  the  intramolecular  one 
which leads in the sum to an energetic more favorable state. This behaviour is reflected in 
Fig. 14 showing the inter-molecular electrostatic energy as function of temperature. 
Figure 10 Total intra  inter van-der-Waals energy as function of temperature for not 
Figure  11  Inter-molecular  van-der-Waals  energy  versus  temperature  for  not  cured  PPO. 
The observed transition range is at similar temperatures as for the total vdW energy. 
Figure  12  Intra-molecular  van-der-Waals  energy  versus  temperature  for  not  cured  PPO. 
The observed transition range is at similar temperatures as for the total vdW energy. 
electrostatic energy 
Figure 13 Intra-molecular electrostatic energy versus temperature for not cured PPO. The 
observed  transition  range  is  at  appreciably  lower  temperatures  than  for  the  total  vdW 
energy. A temperature range is indicated for the intra-molecular electrostatic determined 
transition which sees mainly intra-molecular movements of the PPO chains. 
electrostatic energy 
Figure 14 Inter-molecular electrostatic energy versus temperature for not cured PPO. The 
observed  transition  range  is  at  appreciably  lower  temperatures  than  for  the  total  vdW 
energy.  This  energy  type  is  indicative  for  the  relative  intermolecular  motions  to  each 
3.2  Molecular dynamics simulations with mixtures of binder and plasticizer 
Besides  the  pure  binders  the  mixtures  with  plasticizers  are  of  interest.  The  reasons  are 
first to lower further the glass-to-rubber transition and second to get a propellant paste 
which is suitable for casting in moulds. 
3.21.  Calculations on the mixture 2 HTPB  5 DOA 
The results for HTPB and DOA in a mixture of 2 parts HTPB  5 parts DOA per mol 
which means 29.7 mass- DOA in the mix are presented in Fig. 15 to Fig. 20. The simulations were done with 2 molecules HTPB and 5 molecules DOA in the periodic cell. In Fig. 
15 the inter-molecular vdW energy as function of temperature can be seen. The transition 
is at about -80C to -85C. This is quite well what is found experimentally for such a mixture. The inter-molecular electrostatic energy surprises at the first glance Fig. 16 because 
of the gap between the two regions. In looking on the values and the scattering of the 
high temperature data it may become reasonable. Very small values are obtained which 
reflects the fact that HTPB has nearly no permanent molecular dipoles. Anyway the feature shown in Fig. 16 is quite striking. Before further explanations are given the calculations will be extended to lower temperatures. Fig. 17 shows the inter-molecular potential 
energy with a transition in the same range as the inter-molecular vdW energy. This potential energy is completely dominated by the intermolecular vdW interaction. The intramolecular  potential  energy  in  Fig.  18  has  the  same  transition  range  whereas  the  intramolecular vdW energy has a transition at -95C Fig. 19. Some internal movements in the 
HTPB or in the plasticizer DOA may cause this phenomenon. The intra-molecular electrostatic energy Fig. 20 should be dominated by DOA. The transition is again in accordance 
mixture 2 HTPB  5 DOA
-160 -140 -120 -100 -80
Figure 15 Inter-molecular van-der-Waals energy versus temperature for the mixture of 2 
HTPB  5 DOA  29.7 mass- DOA. The observed transition range is in similar temperature range experimentally found. 
mixture 2 HTPB  5 DOA
-160 -140 -120 -100 -80
Figure  16  Inter-molecular  electrostatic  energy  versus  temperature  for  the  mixture  of  2 
HTPB  5 DOA  29.7 mass- DOA. The energies are very small because there is nearly 
no electrostatic interaction between HTPB. There is no intersection between the lines at 
low and high temperatures indicating the transition. However because of the high scattering one trend line is probably more reasonable for these data. 
mixture 2 HTPB  5 DOA
Figure 17 Inter-molecular potential sum of intermolecular vdW and intermolecular electrostatic energy versus temperature for the mixture of 2 HTPB  5 DOA  29.7 mass- 
DOA.  The  observed  transition  range  is  in  similar  temperature  range  experimentally 
mixture 2 HTPB  5 DOA
-160 -140 -120 -100 -80
Figure  18  Intra-molecular  potential  versus  temperature  for  the  mixture  of  2  HTPB    5 
DOA  29.7 mass- DOA. This energy probes the small segment molecular movements 
intra-molecular vdW 
mixture 2 HTPB  5 DOA
-160 -140 -120 -100 -80
Figure 19 Intra-molecular van-der-Waals energy versus temperature for the mixture of 2 
HTPB  5 DOA  29.7 mass- DOA. The energies are positive means a lot of repulsive 
parts  are  included.  These  reduce  with  lowering  the  temperature  by  reducing  the  intramolecular energy.  
electrostatic energy 
mixture 2 HTPB  5 DOA
-160 -140 -120 -100 -80
Figure  20  Inter-molecular  electrostatic  energy  versus  temperature  for  the  mixture  of  2 
HTPB    5  DOA    29.7  mass-  DOA.  The  energies  are  small  because  there  is  nearly  no 
electrostatic interaction in HTPB. 
3.2.2  Calculations on the mixture 2 PPO  10 DOA 
The mixture of PPO and DOA contains in the simulation cell 2 molecules PPO and 
10 molecules DOA which results in 46.6 mass- DOA content in the mixture. This is already  a  quite  high  percentage  with  regard  to  binder  plasticization.  The  formal  experimental density was obtained by the ICT Thermodynamic code on the base of experimental densities for DOA 0.925 gml at 25C and polypropylene glycol 1.003 gml at 20C. 
In a data sheet of company DuPont the density of polyether diols based on PPG is given 
as 1.01 gml at 25C.  
 mixture 2 PPO   10 DOA
y  -8E-07x2 - 0.0005x  0.9862
experimental density
-180 -160 -140 -120 -100
Figure 21 Density of mixture 2 PPO  10 DOA versus temperature. The data are fitted 
with a polynomial of degree 2 as averaging curve. 
 mixture 2 PPO   10 DOA
experimental density
Figure 22 Density of  mixture 2 PPO  10 DOA  versus  temperature. Two regions appear 
with different slopes of the fitted lines. 
The Fig. 21 shows the density as function of temperature. An experimental value is 
included as circled star dot which is in close proximity to the calculated data. The Fig. 22 
demonstrates the two regions with a transition at about -65C. The inter-molecular vdW 
energy Fig. 23 shows a transition around -65C. Pure PPO has a transition at about -50C 
see Fig. 11. The inter-molecular potential has a transition at about -70C Fig. 24. In the 
inter-molecular  electrostatic  energy  Fig.  25  the  transition  is  about  at  -60C.  The  intramolecular vdW and electrostatic energies can be seen in Fig. 26 and Fig. 27. Their transitions  seem  to  happen  at  lower  temperatures  whereby  the  intra-molecular  electrostatic 
energy  is  not  well  defined  in  the  transition  range.  The  lower  transition  temperature  in 
the  intra-molecular  vdW  energy  suggests  internal  chain  mobilities  which  cease  only  at 
quite low temperatures.  
 inter-molecular vdW 
mixture 2 PPO  10 DOA
Figure  23  Inter-molecular  van-der-Waals  energy  of  the  mixture  2  PPO    10  DOA  versus 
temperature. Two regions appear with different slopes of the fitted lines. 
mixture 2 PPO  10 DOA
sum of intermol. vdW  intermol. Coulomb
Figure 24 Inter-molecular potential sum of intermolecular vdW and intermolecular electrostatic energy versus temperature for the mixture of 2 PPO  10 DOA  46.6 mass- 
electrostatic energy 
mixture 2 PPO  10 DOA
Figure  25  Inter-molecular  electrostatic  energy  versus  temperature  for  the  mixture  of  2 
PPO  10 DOA  46.6 mass- DOA. The energies are small because there are only small 
electrostatic interactions in PPODOA. 
intra-molecular vdW 
mixture 2 PPO  10 DOA
Figure 26 Intra-molecular van-der-Waals energy versus temperature for the mixture of 2 
PPO  10 DOA  46.6 mass- DOA. The energies are positive means a lot of repulsive 
parts  are  included.  These  reduce  with  lowering  the  temperature  by  reducing  the  intramolecular energy. 
mixture 2 PPO  10 DOA
electrostatic energy 
Figure  27  Intra-molecular  electrostatic  energy  versus  temperature  for  the  mixture  of  2 
PPO  10 DOA  46.6 mass- DOA. The energies are positive means a lot of repulsive 
parts are included. 
The atomistic simulation of CHON compounds describes the molecular dynamics of 
the molecules and mixtures of them when well developed force fields for the condensed 
phase  are  used.  The  used  program  suite  Materials  StudioTM  allows  to  calculate  intermolecular  and  intra-molecular  energy  terms  based  on  the  atom  properties  assigned  by 
the  used  force  field  COMPASSTM  and  its  interaction  expression.  The  densities  of  the  systems  considered  are  well  reproduced.  The  van-der-Waals  and  electrostatic  interactions 
are obtained. The temperature dependence of these energies probes the molecular mobility  behaviour  of  the  molecular  systems.  All  show  a  transition  region  as  function  of 
temperature.  Theses  transition  regions  coincide  well  with  experimentally  determined 
glass-to-liquid  transitions  in  going  from  the  liquid  state  to  an  amorphous  glassy  solid 
state.  With  elastomeric  binders  formed  with  the  investigated  pre-polymers  one  has  the 
glass-to-rubber transition.  
There  may  be  differences  in  the  transition  temperature  ranges  with  the  intermolecular energies and the intra-molecular energies because of the different probing of 
the  material.  The  intermolecular  energies  seem  to  be  sensitive  for  the  larger  segment 
movements  of  the  polymer  chains  whereas  the  intra-molecular  energies  are  influenced 
by small segment movements or group movements. The so-named freezing temperatures 
should be different which was found. Further differences arise with the presence or absence of dipoles in the polymer chain which modulate the results in special ways and this 
even more in contact with plasticizers. 
company Accelrys Inc. San Diego CA USA 
atomistic simulation 
cohesive energy density 
List of abbreviations 
Condensed phase Optimized Molecular Potentials for Atomistic Simulation 
electrostatic interaction between point charges on atoms or atom groups 
molecular  statistical  ensemble  with  the  controllable  variables  number  of 
molecules N temperature T pressure P 
van der Waals interaction 
hydroxyl terminated polybutadiene 
polypropylene oxide also polypropylene glycol PPG 
polypropylene glycol same as polypropylene oxide 
Charles Dubois Ricardo Pontes Lima tienne Comtois 
Chemical Engineering Dept. cole Polytechnique de Montreal Montral Canada 
Stochastic modeling of Glycidyl Azide Polymer  Bi-Propargyl Succinate Reaction 
Glycidyl Azide Polymer GAP is a low molecular weight energetic polymer that can be 
used  as  a  binder  or  structural  material  after  a  proper  copolymerization  to  a  thermoset 
plastic  or  elastomer.  Traditionally  this  is  accomplished  by  using  an  urethane-based 
chemistry  on  GAP  having  terminal  hydroxyl  groups.  Recently  it  has  been  shown  that 
GAP can also be co-polymerized with molecules bearing at least two unsaturated bonds 
such  as  the  bi-propargyl  succinate  BPS  via  a  reaction  with  azide  groups  to  lead  to 
triazoles  cycles.  The  kinetics  of  this  reaction  is  not  as  well  documented  as  the  GAPisocyanate  curing  process.  It  is  however  recognized  that  several  time-dependent 
properties of the GAP-BPS reactive mixture such as viscosity and diffusivity will depend 
on  the  degree  of  polymerization  thus  affecting  the  processing  of  energetic  materials 
formulations  that  may  contain  this  binder.  During  the  polymerization  reaction  the 
molecular weight distribution MWD evolves with time. In this work we use Monte-Carlo 
simulations  and  apparent  kinetics  parameters  to  calculate  the  MWD  of  a  GAP-BPS 
system as a function of time. The effect of the azide  unsaturated bonds initial ratio is 
investigated. As a result the time to gel point of several formulations was estimated and 
compared  to  experimental  data.    When  coupled  with  rheological  models  based  on  a 
distribution of relaxation times the chemo-rheology of GAB-BPS reactive blends can be 
estimated from the spectrum of relaxation time themselves obtained for the simulated 
Treatment of 246-Trinitrotoluene Wastewater by Freeze Crystallization 
E. Takyi1 J. H. Joo1 K. J .Kim1 H. S. Kim 2  
1. Crystallization Process and Engineering Laboratory Hanbat National University SAN 16-1    
Yuseong-ku Daejeon 305-719 Korea.                                                                                                          
2. Agency for Defense Development Korea 
Treatment  of  TNT  redwater  by  freeze  crystallization  has  been  studied  in  a  scraped  surface  crystallizer. 
Crystal  growth  of ice  from  wastewater  was  accessed.  Using  initial  supercooling  levels  between  0.1  and 
3.5oC and concentration range of 1000 to 10000mgL COD the growth anisotropy of ice crystals was in 
the range from 0.8 to 5x10-7ms. The efficiency of separation was determined by the percentage reduction 
in  original  COD  of  the  melt  and  effective  distribution  coefficient  between  the  crystals  and  the  residual 
melt. For initial COD of a 3000mgL the red water was treated under 90mgL COD which represented 
97  COD  reduction.  With  different  ice  seed  mass  size  and  ratios  the  yield  and  purity  of  the  product 
crystals were also studied. Eventually freeze crystallization can be used for treatment of TNT wastewater Synthesis Characterization and DFT calculation of a novel HMXDMI Cocrystal 
He Lin1 Shun-Guan Zhu1 Hong-Zhen Li2 and Xin-Hua Peng1 
1School of Chemical Engineering Nanjing University of Science and Technology 
Nanjing Jiangsu 210094 China 
2Institute of Chemical Materials Chinese Academy of Engineering Physics 
Mianyang Sichuan 621900 China 
Email zhusgmail.njust.edu.cn 
1357-tetranitro-1357-tetrazacyclooctane  HMX 
  13-dimethyl-2-imidazolidinone  DMI 
cocrystal  explosive  was  synthesized  and  characterized  by  using  X-ray  single  crystal  diffraction. 
HMXDMI cocrystal crystallizes in the monoclinic system space group Cm with cell parameters 
a7.2312  b14.7392  c7.5521   96.66.  In  addition  density  functional  theory 
involving binding energy natural bond orbital NBO analysis atoms in molecule AIM analysis 
band structure and density of states was adopted to investigate intermolecular interactions for the 
formation of HMXDMI cocrystal. The results show that hydrogen bondings between methylene 
groups  of  HMX  molecules  and  O  atoms  of  DMI  molecules  are  the  main  intermolecular 
interactions. This research provides the basis for further design of cocrystal explosives which are 
composed of HMX and energetic materials. 
Keywords HMX DMI cocrystal intermolecular interactions density functional theory 
Insensitive high energy density materials IHEDMs have attracted considerable attention in 
the  last  decades1-5  due  to  their  high  thermal  stability  good  detonation  performance  and 
insensitivity  towards  external  stimuli.  Numerous  researches  are  concentrated  on  exploration  of 
novel  IHEDMs1-3  and  improving  performance  of  existing  HEDMs.45  Unfortunately 
detonation  performance  and  sensitivity  are  mutually  exclusive  and  most  of  current  HEDMs 
cannot meet the requirements of IHEDMs. Recently cocrystallization the formation of crystal of 
two or more neutral components at a specific molar ratio is emerging as an attractive strategy to 
improve  the  performance  of  existing  HEDMs.6-14  When  cocrystallizing  with  an  IHEDM 
sensitive  HEDMs  are  stabilized  without  changing  their  chemical  structures  and  reducing 
detonation  performance.  In  addition  crystal  density  and  oxygen  balance  two  important 
parameters in determining detonation performance can be dramatically tailored. 13 
1357-tetranitro-1357-tetrazacyclooctane  HMX  is  a  famous  HEDM. But  its  application 
is limited owing to its high sensitivity. In order to address this problem Matzger and co-workers 
prepared a  novel  HMXCL-20  cocrystal10and  seven HMX  cocrystals  containing non-energetic 
materials.9  In  addition  to  these  HMX  cocrystals  HMXN-methyl-2-pyrrolidone  NMP6 
HMXNN-dimethylformamide DMF15  and HMX24-dinitro-24-diazapentane16  cocrystals 
were  reported and determined  by  using X-ray single crystal diffractionXRD. Unfortunately all 
these cocrystals possess low densities or high sensitivities. Meanwhile intermolecular interactions 
driving  forces  for  the  formation  of  cocrystal  explosive  are  usually  characterized  by  using 
geometrical approach that  interatomic distances should be shorter than van der Waals radii sum. 
However  for  many  weak  intermolecular  interactions  interatomic  distances  are  significantly 
longer  than  van  der  Waals  radii  sum.17  Therefore  further  researches  are  indeed  essential  to 
examine HMX cocrystals both experimentally and theoretically. 
Herein we synthesized and characterized a novel cocrystal which is composed of HMX and 
13-dimethyl-2-imidazolidinone  DMI  at  11  molar  ratio.  Furthermore  we  employed  atoms  in 
molecules  AIM  theory18  and  natural  bond  orbital  NBO  analysis19  to  investigate 
intermolecular  interactions  between  HMX  and  DMI  despite  some  controversies.20-22  Band 
structure  and  density  of  states  DOS  of  HMXDMI  cocrystal  were  also  calculated  by  means  of 
periodic density functional theory. The purpose of this research is to provide some novel insight in 
the HMX cocrystal design. 
2.  Experimental and theoretical sections 
2.1  X-ray single crystal diffraction study 
One gram of HMX was added to the DMI solution 25.00ml with stirring for 0.5h at room 
temperature.  The  solution  was  filtered  and  the  filtrate  was  left  to  stand  undisturbed.  Then  the 
solution was evaporated at 40  until colorless HMXDMI cocrystals appeared. 
Intensity  data  of  HMXDMI  cocrystal  were  collected  at  room  temperature  with  Bruker 
SMART APEX II diffractometer by using Mo-K X-ray radiation  0.71069 and a graphite 
monochromator.  The  structure  was  solved  by  direct  method  and  refined  by  the  full-matrix 
least-squares on F2 by using SHELXTL-97 program.2324 All non-hydrogen atoms were refined 
anisotropically  and  hydrogen  atoms  were  generated  geometrically.  The  most  relevant 
crystallographic  data  of  HMXDMI  cocrystal  was  summarized  in  Table  1.  Crystal  data  of 
HMXDMI  cocrystal  has  been  deposited  to  the  Cambridge  Crystallographic  Data  Center  12 
depositccdc.cam.ac.uk and is available free of charge by quoting the deposition number CCDC 
Table 1 Crystal data and structure refinement of HMXDMI cocrystal 
Absorption coefficient 
 range for data collection 
No. of measured independent and observed 
Maxmin. indices hkl 
Datarestraintsparameters 
2.2  Quantum-chemical calculations 
0.0498 0.1144 1.028 
Initially  geometrical  structures  of  HMXDMI  complexes  were  taken  from  XRD.  Then 
binding  energies  of  HMXDMI  complexes  were  estimated  at  M062x6-311G2df2p  level  as 
well as at MP26-311G2df2p level. Basis set superposition error BSSE was corrected using 
Boys-Bernardi  counterpoise  procedure.25  Additionally  we  performed  NBO  analysis  at 
M062x6-311G2df2p level to further characterize their intermolecular interactions in terms of 
charge transfer from occupied Lewis orbitals to unoccupied non-Lewis orbitals. Finally we used 
AIM  theory  to  investigate  topological  properties  within  HMXDMI  complexes  together  with 
electron  densities  calculated  using  M062x6-311G2df2p  wave  function.  AIM  analysis  was 
implemented in AIM2000 and all other calculations were carried out in Gaussian09.26 
To  deeply  understand  condensed  structure  of  HMXDMI  cocrystal  we  calculated  band 
structure  and  DOS.  First  principles  calculations  were  performed  in  the  CASTEP  code.27 
Geometry  optimization  was  carried  out  using  the  Broyden-Fletcher-Goldfrab-Shanno  BFGS 
method.28  Interactions  between  electrons  and  core 
treated  with  ultrasoft 
pseudopotential  and  Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof  PBE  function29  of  the  generalized  gradient 
approximation GGA were employed to calculate exchange-correlation effects. Dispersions were 
corrected using Grimme method.30 Moreover the kinetic cut-off energy of 400eV and a k-point 
mesh of 333 in the Brillouin zone were implemented to balance accuracy and efficiency. In the 
geometry optimization the total energy was converged to 1.010-5eV displacement of atoms less 
than 0.001 and the stress smaller than 0.05GPa. 
3 Results and discussion 
3.1 Molecular structure 
                                          a                                                                      b 
                                                                                  c 
Figure 1 Cystal packing of HMXDMI cocrystal with a view along the c axis and self-assembly 
motifs  of  HMX  dimmers  determined  using  XRD.  Dash  lines  represent  short  contacts.  O1O2 
2.954  O1N1  2.979  O1H1A  2.598  O1N2  2.949  O1H1B  2.646  O1C 
HMXDMI cocrystal is  crystallized in the  monoclinic  crystal  system with  Cm space group. 
As  shown  in  Figure  1a  molecules  are  arranged  in  alternate  layers  of  HMX  and  DMI.  HMX 
molecules  display  chair-chair  conformations  which  are  well  consistent  with  those  in  previous 
HMX cocrystals.6915 In the DMI layer no significant intermolecular interactions are observed. 
However the weak CHO CO OO and ON interactions are identified in the HMX layer 
by  using  geometrical  approach  as  shown  in  Figure  1b  and  1c.  The  shortest  contact  is  CHO 
interaction  2.598  while  the  longest  contact  is  OO  interaction  2.954.  Moreover  R 8 
assembly motif is observed which stabilizes HMX dimers to a great extent. 
Intermolecular interactions between HMX and DMI the driving forces for the formation of 
HMXDMI cocrystal are also analyzed by using geometrical approach and shown in Figure 2 and 
Table 2. Two main types of intermolecular interactions can be classified as follows one involving 
interactions  between  methylene  groups  of HMX  molecules  and  O  atoms  of  DMI  molecules  the 
other interactions contributed from nitro group of HMX molecules. Interactions in Figure 2 II are 
the  same  as  those  in  HMX2-pyrrolidone9and  HMXNMP  cocrystals6  suggesting  that 
methylene group of HMX molecule possesses high chemical reactivity and easily forms hydrogen 
bondings  with  electron  withdrawing  groups.  Besides  as  is  evident  in  Figure  2  I  2  III  and  2  IV 
nitro group of HMX molecules can also form various interactions with electron donating groups. 
Indeed  some  weak  stacking  interactions  such  as  CN  and  CO  interactions  also  play  an 
important role in stabilizing HMXDMI cocrystal. 
                                            I                                                                II 
22                                        III                                                                IV 
Figure 2 Self-assembly motifs of HMXDMI complexes determined using XRD. Dash lines 
represent short contacts. 
Table 2 Intermolecular interactions between HMX and DMI characterized using XRD 
stacking interactions 
Symmetry code i x1-yz ii 1x -1y  -1z iii x  -1yz iv x1yz v 12x -12yz 
the  uncorrected  and  corrected  binding  energies 
-EHMXDMI-EHMX-EDMI at M062x6-311G2df2pMP26-311G2df2p level. 
As  seen  from  Table  3  large  intermolecular  interactions  exist  between  HMX  and  DMI. 
Uncorrected  binding  energies  are  expectedly  larger  than  corrected  binding  energies  due  to  the 
basis set superposition error. Binding energies obtained at M062x6-311G2df2p level are quite 
close  to  those  derived  at  MP26-311G2df2p  level  showing  M062x  functional  is  a  reliable 
approach  to  investigate  intermolecular  interactions  in  HMXDMI  complexes.  Additionally  the 
order of binding energies is complex II  complex III  complex I  complex IV representing that 
the stability of HMXDMI complexes. Binding energy of complex II is the largest suggesting that 
self-assembly  approach  of  complex  II  plays  a  dominated  role  for  the  formation  of  HMXDMI 
Table 3 Binding energies kJmol between HMX and DMI   
a Ec is corrected by BSSE. 
NBO  analysis  has  proven  a  useful  tool  to  investigate  intramolecular  or  intermolecular 
interactions19 in terms of a set of occupied Lewis and unoccupied non-Lewis localized orbitals. 
Delocalization  of  electron  density  between  occupied  Lewis  and  unoccupied  non-Lewis  orbitals 
corresponding to stabilized donor-acceptor interactions can be examined and evaluated by using 
second-order  perturbation  theory.31  Besides  donor-acceptor  interaction  caused  by  electron 
density transfer from donor NBO i to acceptor NBO j is expressed as32 
NBO  analysis  results  of  HMXDMI  complexes  are  listed  in  Table  4.  According  to  the 
calculation  results  from  experimental  structures  intermolecular  interactions  BD2  N5-O4   
BD1 C3-O5 BD1 C5-H5C    BD1 C2-H2A BD2 C3-O5    RY1 O4 are 0.92 0.92 
0.84kJmol  respectively  which  are  the  main  driving  forces  for  the  formation  of  complex  I.  In 
complex  II  the  main  intermolecular  interactions  turn  out  to  be  LP1  O12    BD1  C7-H7B 
2.18kJmol  LP2  O12    BD1  C7-H7A  1.76kJmol  and  BD2  C8-O12    RY5  N13 
0.84kJmol. On the other hand in complex III intermolecular interactions are dominated by LP1 
O15    BD1 C14-H14A 1.46kJmol LP2 O15    BD1 C14-H14A 1.13kJmol and LP1 
O18    BD1  C14-H14B  1.00kJmol.  Moreover  intermolecular  interactions  LP1  O23   
BD1  C20-H20B  1.42kJmol  LP2  O23    BD 1  C19-H19B  0.42kJmol  as  well  as  LP3 
O23     BD1  C20-H20B  0.75kJmol  result  the  formation  of  complex  IV.  Obviously 
intermolecular  interactions of complexes  II and  III are  much  stronger than those of complexes  I 
and IV indicating that complexes II and III are more stable than complexes I and IV. Furthermore 
2ijiijFijEqthe  order  of  intermolecular  interactions  strength  is  complex  II    complex  III    complex  I   
complex IV which is in good agreement with binding energy analysis. 
Table 4 Values of E interaction energy of HMXDMI complexes at M062x-311G2df2p by 
means of NBO analysis 
The  topological  analysis  of  electron  density  provides  evidence  for  the  existence  of 
intermolecular  interactions  in  HMXDMI  complexes.18  We  used  the  electron  density    its 
Laplacian  2  and  the  electronic  energy  density  H  to  analyze  topological  properties  at  the 
bond critical point BCP. In general  is greater than 0.20 au in a covalent interaction and less 
than 0.10 au in a closed shell interaction ionic van der Waals hydrogen bonding etc.. Laplacian 
of  electron  density  which  is  the  trace  of  the  Hessian  also  determines  the  interaction  type.  A 
negative sign of Laplacian of electron density signifies covalent interactions and its positive sign 
stands  for  closed  shell  interactions.  Furthermore  the  electronic  energy  density  H  composed  of 
electronic  potential  energy  density  V  and  electronic  kinetic  energy  density  G  at  a  BCP  is  a 
more apropriate index to understand interactions.3334 The sign of electronic energy density at a 
BCP  determines  whether  the  interaction  is  a  covalent  interaction  H0  or  a  closed  shell 
Table 5 Topological properties in a.u. of electron density at BCP and energies of interactions 
derived from AIM theory Econt kJmol for HMXDMI complexes 
Table  5  lists  topological  properties  of  HMXDMI  complexes  at  M062x6-311G2df2p 
level.  It is observed that the    values are in the range of 0.0034  -  0.0134 au.    values are much 
lower  than  0.20  au  but  are  significantly  higher  than  the  practical  boundary  of  a  molecule  
0.001e-3 indicating that intermolecular interactions between HMX and DMI are indeed closed 
shell  interactions.  Intermolecular  interactions  indicated by  the  sign  of  H  or  2  are  also  closed 
shell interactions. Interestingly it is found that electron densities of C6H6AO12 C7H7BO12 
are  much  higher  than  other  interactions  suggesting  that  complex  II  is  the  most  stable 
self-assembly approach. This result well agrees with that from binding energy and NBO analysis. 
However  types  of  intermolecular  interactions  and  values  of  intermolecular  interaction  energy 
from NBO analysis contradict results from AIM analysis. 
In  the  four  HMXDMI  complexes  unconventional  CHO  type  hydrogen  bondings  play  a 
key  role  in  stabilizing  complexes.  Bond  lengths  of  CHO  interactions  ranging  from  2.285  to 
2.553 are much shorter than the sum of the normal vdW radii 2.72 of the hydrogen 1..2 
and oxygen atoms 1.52.35 Although electron density values of CHO interactions are much 
lower than conventional OHO interactions they are much larger than those of CHCH OO 
interactions. Therefore the unconventional CHO interactions stabilize the HMXDMI cocrystal 
to a great extent in addition to CHCH OO CHN NN and NO interactions. 
3.5 Band structure and DOS 
Figure 3 Band structure of HMXDMI cocrystal            Figure 4 Total DOS and PDOS   
In order to investigate the condensed structure of HMXDMI cocrystal its band structure was 
calculated  and  shown  in  Figure  3.  The  top  valence  band  VB  exhibits  a  large  dispersion 
bandwidth whereas the bottom of conduction bands CB shows a small dispersion. HMXDMI 
cocrystal is an electrical insulator with a band gap of 1.81eV. Besides VBs and CBs of HMXDMI 
are  quite  flat  in  the  Brillion  zone  suggesting  that  large  quantities  of  intermolecular  interactions 
exist in the HMXDMI cocrystal. 
DOS is a presentation of band structure of a crystal. Its projected density of state PDOS is a 
better  approach  to  understand  band  structure  of  anisotropic  solids  which  is  extensively  used  to 
investigate the constitution of energy bands.36-38 Total DOS TDOS and PDOS are shown in 
Figure 4. Fermi energy is plotted by the dot line. The main characteristics of DOS are summarized 
as follows. i the top of VBs  in TDOS exhibits three main peaks for HMXDMI cocrystal. The 
peaks  ranging  from  -2.5  to  0  eV  are  mainly  contributed  from  N2p  and  O2p  orbitals  a  little 
mixing  with  C2p  and  H1s  orbitals.  However  in  the  region  of  -10  -  -2.5  eV  the  peaks  are 
dominated by C2p and N2p orbitals as well as O2p and H1s orbitals. The peaks in the range of 
-15  -  -10 eV are not only resulted from N2p orbitals but also a little from H1s orbitals. ii the 
bottom of CBs in TDOS is dominated by N2p orbital with a small contribution from H1s orbital. 
iii the peaks of TDOS are mainly contributed from O2p and N2p orbitals suggesting that N and 
O atoms play an important role in stabilizing HMXDMI cocrystal. Moreover VBs in the TDOS 
are also dominated by O2p and N2p orbitals indicating that N and O atoms can attract electrons 
strongly  and  their  orbitals  are  almost  filled.  Therefore  intermolecular  interactions  stabilize 
HMXDMI cocrystal to a great extent. 
In conclusion we synthesized a novel cocrystal explosive containing HMX and DMI and its 
crystal  structure  was  characterized  by  using  x-ray  single  crystal  diffraction.  Intermolecular 
interactions  between  HMX  and  DMI  determined  by  using  geometrical  method  reveals  that  the 
main  driving  forces  for  the  formation  of  HMXDMI  cocrystal  are  unconventional  CHO 
hydrogen  bondings CN and CO  interactions.  Meanwhile  in  order  to obtain  more  accurate 
results  we  also  employed  density  functional  theory  to  characterize  intermolecular  interactions 
between HMXDMI. The results show that CHO hydrogen bondings are the main driving forces 
for  the  formation  of  HMXDMI  cocrystal  in  addition  to  CHCH  OO  CHN  NN  and 
NO interactions. Although there are some differences in the intermolecular interaction analysis 
results by using these two different methods it indicates that methylene groups of HMX possess 
high chemical reactivity and easily form hydrogen bondings with electron withdraw groups. Nitro 
group  of  HMX  can  also  form  various  interactions  with  electron  donating  groups.  With  these  in 
mind it is expected to help further design of HMX cocrystal. This research provides some novel 
insights in the development of HMX cocrystal.